CLAUDIA GORDON: Good afternoon, everyone.
It's good to see my fellow Council members
present today,
and the NCD staff.
They're a hard working staff.
It's a little but mighty staff--
the agency is small,
but very, very effective.
My name is Claudia Gordon,
and I am the Vice Chair
of the NCD Council.
I also currently serve as Acting Chair.
This is following the sudden
and untimely passing of our previous
Chair,
Andrés Gallegos.
That took place this past December
unfortunately.
We will take some time to honor him
today.
But I would like to now
officially call that meeting to order.
Before I do that,
for those of you
who are joining this meeting,
the National Council on Disability,
we are an independent,
nonpartisan federal agency.
We are charged with providing advice
to the President and to Congress
and to other federal agencies
on different matters and issues that arise
and that are connected to disability.
That's who we are.
And we achieve that end goal by reviewing
and evaluating
different policies and emerging issues
that specifically impact
the disability community.
So with that, I will now go ahead and ask
Miss Netterie Lewis
to take over,
beginning with roll call
of our Council members.
NETTERIE LEWIS: Okay, Thank you.
Vice Chair, Acting Chair, Madam
Claudia Gordon.
I'm calling on Hoskie Benally.
Calling on Sasha Bittner.
COUNCIL MEMBER BITTNER: Present.
LEWIS: Calling on Theo Braddy.
COUNCIL MEMBER BRADDY: I am here.
LEWIS: Shawn Kennemer will not be present.
and it’s noted. Calling on Risa Rifkind
COUNCIL MEMBER RIFKIND: Present.
LEWIS: Calling on Neil Romano.
COUNCIL MEMBER ROMANO: Present.
LEWIS: And lastly calling
on Emily Voorde.
COUNCIL MEMBER VOORDE: Present.
LEWIS: Okay,
I yield the floor back to you Vice Chair,
Acting Chair Madam Claudia Gordon.
AC Gordon: Okay.  Thank you.
LEWIS: Okay, so
I'm making a roll call on
staff, interns and contractors.
Mr. Stacey Brown.
BROWN:  Oh, sorry about that.
Present.
LEWIS: Joan Durocher.
DUROCHER: Present.
LEWIS: Kimie Eacobacci.
EACOBACCI: Present.
LEWIS: Lisa Grubb
has noted that she will not be president.
So noting Lisa's absence,
calling Executive Director
Anne Sommers McIntosh.
MCINTOSH: Present.
LEWIS: Amy Nicholas.
NICHOLAS: Present.
LEWIS: Nick Sabula.
SABULA: Present.
LEWIS: Amged Soliman.
SOLIMAN: Present.
LEWIS: Ana Torres-Davis.
TORRES-DAVIS: Present.
LEWIS: Amanda Lowe.
LOWE: Present.
LEWIS: Keith Woods.
WOODS: Present.
LEWIS: Kadedra Walters.
WALTERS: Present.
LEWIS: Okay,
I yield the floor back to you Vice Chair.
Acting Chair.
Madam Claudia Gordon.
Thank you, Ms..
Lewis.
I think before we proceed,
I want to make sure
the communication is good for everyone.
We will be using captioning.
We also --
I'm using American Sign Language.
So we have interpreters.
Hopefully our participants who rely on
American Sign Language can also see me
clearly and also see the interpreters
for anyone who needs that.
And also that captioning is available.
So that's just a quick accessibility
check and the interpreter who's currently
speaking English for me right
now, interpreting is off camera,
but you should see the other interpreters
who will be interpreting into ASL
on screen.
Also, I want to mention that Shawn
Kennemer, our Council member,
will not be present today
and has asked me to be his proxy
for any future voting.
So I just wanted to bring that up
and make sure that we have
that amendment for today
added to the notes
that I will be serving as proxy.
Now, our first order of business
today is to proceed with a vote
for from the council members
to accept the minutes.
Actually, let me say accept the Council
agenda first.
So I would love to get a motion
from our fellow
Council members to proceed with that.
The accepting of the agenda as presented.
Anyone would like to move?
CM BITTNER: I move that we accept
the agenda as presented.
GORDON:  Thank you,
Sascha.
Can I get a second for that?
CM Romano: Second.
AC Gordon: Okay.
Thank you, Neil.
Any discussion?
If there's no discussion,
then I will turn it back over to Ms..
Lewis to collect the votes.
LEWIS: Okay.
Thank you.
Calling on Hoskie Benally.
Okay.
We're still waiting for Hoskie.
Sascha Bittner?
CM BITTNER: Yes.
LEWIS: Theo Braddy?
CM BRADDY: Here.
LEWIS: Noting that Shawn Kennemer is not present.
Risa Rifkind?
RIFKIND: Yes.
LEWIS: Neal Romano.
CM ROMANO: Yes.
LEWIS: Lastly, Emily Voorde.
CM VOORDE: Yes.
LEWIS: I yield the floor back to you Vice Chair,
Acting Chair.
Madam Claudia Gordon.
AC GORDON: Okay.
Thank you, Mr.
Ms.. Lewis.
And yes, I'm in favor as well.
Okay.
I actually wanted to introduce the video
first for everyone because some may not
have had the good fortune
of being familiar with Andrés.
So I want to take this opportunity
just to share a little bit
before we went ahead
and showed the honor tribute video to him.
My fellow Council members.
I think we haven't accepted the actual
meeting minutes as well before the video.
And can you confirm
if we've actually accepted the meetings,
the minutes, or should we do that
after the video is shown?
EXEC DIR SOMMERS MCINTOSH: We have that queued up for the Executive Committee
portion of the meeting.
So we're fine proceeding with the video.
AC GORDON: Okay, great, great.
So we'll go ahead and do the video
and then we'll do the meeting minutes
from the prior meeting.
So before
we actually get into the business portion,
we wanted to properly give time and space
to honor our former Chairman
and remember him in
this space.
His unexpected and untimely
passing
happened on December 1st
and really impacted all of us greatly.
Our hearts were really saddened
and I'm sure by the participants as well
who had the privilege of knowing him,
and many of
us have struggled with his passing
and we are still grieving.
His loss for us and still very raw.
It's a huge loss
for the disability community
and the disability movement.
He was an amazing lawyer,
leader, mentor, friend to many of us
and we're fortunate
to have been able to work with him.
Unfortunately, not long enough.
I was really looking forward
to his mentorship and learning from him
and that unfortunately was cut short.
So now we want to play this video.
We want to go ahead
and show the video of this tribute
that was put together
by one of our staff members.
Nick,
thank you so much, Nick, for everything
that you invested in getting this video
developed
to properly honor Andrés,
who inspires us
and has contributed so much.
So Miss Lewis as well,
if you wouldn't mind, go ahead.
Thank you.
Go ahead and play the video.
I was honored to be designated as Chairman
of the National Council on Disability.
I am a Hispanic male with fair
complexion, exceedingly
gray hair, black framed glasses,
and I am a proud member of the disability
community Class of 1996,
having sustained a spinal cord injury
resulting in quadriplegia
in an automobile accident.
As a person with a spinal cord injury,
I, like so many others,
have experienced the realities
of trying to attain medical care
while confronting the seismic barriers
that still exist
despite the over 30 years
since the Americans with Disabilities Act
became law,
so many of us have stories to tell.
Sir, you wrote the Americans
with Disabilities Act.
That's a big friggin deal.
Gentlemen,
the National Council on Disability,
with nine Presidentially
and Congressionally appointed members,
carries a statutory mission
to advise the President,
his administration, Congress and federal
agencies on all policy matters impacting
people with disabilities. The health
and well-being of people with disabilities
have long been ignored in this country.
This occurs despite the existence
of an overwhelming body of studies
and reports that unequivocally document
the significant and continuing
prevalence of health disparities that
exist between people with disabilities
and our non-disabled counterparts.
The National Council on Disability
was fighting for federal legislation
to protect the rights of persons with disabilities
since its inception. NCD has worked to develop
a health equity framework
to provide policymakers in Congress
and in the administration with a blueprint
to take action.
The adoption of enforceable medical
diagnostic equipment standards
is just one step towards health equity
for persons with mobility disabilities
and is just one component of NCD's
pursuit of health equity for all people
with disabilities--for an all of government
approach to address health disparities.
The framework was one year
in the making with the input of our
then-Council members, members
of the disability community and a dream
team of 14 advisors
comprised of health care disparities
researchers, physicians
caring for people with disabilities,
health care and disability law professors,
among others.
It's a matter of attaining
and maintaining good health.
It's critically
important for everyone, but more so for persons with disabilities.
It's truly the predicate to our ability to live, our ability to learn,
and our ability to work and earn. Into the forefront of discussions
that are taking place in medical schools
and perhaps at the associations here.
I have to impart with
your, our house is on fire.
The issues that we're
talking about here, when individuals like me
can't get weighed at medical appointments
because there's
no wheelchair accessible weight skills,
when we don't get transferred
onto examination tables
for full physical examination
because of the inability
or the unwillingness of providers to do so.
And then we see a heightened percentage
of people with spinal cord injuries
and mobility disabilities being diagnosed
with colon cancer because they're simply
not being checked or prostate cancer
because they're simply not being checked.
We don't have time for polite
conversations in your respective schools.
We need some action,
and that has to happen.
And so I impart to you
that our house is on fire
and these issues need resolution.
Let's remember that
disability is a natural part of the human condition.
Let us
remember that disability is not a characteristic that stands alone,
but it is one that intersects
with all other aspects
of a person's identity,
such as age, race, ethnicity,
income level, sexual orientation,
gender identity and religion.
Let us recommit to shaping a future
in which all members of this beautiful
community can have and enjoy full rights,
free from discrimination
to live self-directed, independent lives.
To achieve our full potential.
Achieving our full potential is only possible
if we're able to attain and maintain good health.
AC GORDON: That was beautiful.
Interpreters, Are we ready?
For people
who are relying on the interpretation,
we have Samantha,
who is currently signing.
So if you want to go ahead
and pin the interpreter, please do so.
I'm actually signing right now
so you can pin me.
But if you need the interpreter later,
I just want to say thank you to Nick
and the staff for pulling
such an amazing video together.
Such an amazing tribute to honor Andrés Gallegos.
Before I move forward with other business,
I wanted to mention one other thing related to Andrés.
An announcement to make.
Before we make the announcement.
I’d like to ask my fellow Council members
if anyone had any brief remarks
that they wanted to make about Andrés
or to share any words about Andrés
before we proceeded with business,
I'd like to give the floor to you.
CM BITTNER: I had some remarks
Are you ready?
AC GORDON: Please, please go ahead, Sascha.
CM BITTNER: One second.
Andrés was such an amazing, dedicated man.
with a clear vision for
what he wanted the Council to accomplish
on behalf of disabled Americans.
is leadership, passion, and sense of urgency
regarding  the critical responsibility with which we have been tasked
has  motivated and inspired all of us on the Council.
Andrés not only  possessed a sweeping understanding of the challenges
facing our  community and the policy changes needed to address them,
but was also just so personally kind, funny, generous and supportive.
When I was sworn on to the Council and acknowledged
all those who  had made it possible for me to get to this point,
I referred to them as my team.  Andrés warmly welcomed me to the Council.
I was deeply touched when he said he was now a
member of Team Sasha too.
Andrés strongly encouraged me to use my time on the Council
to uplift the issues I find important.
Even though I knew him
for such a short time,
I will always consider him a mentor.
And will do my best
to live up to his example.
Thank you.
AC GORDON: Thank you so much, Sascha.
Before we continue,
what anyone else, fellow Council members,
are there any of the comments or words
to share regarding our former Chairman
Andrés, before we proceed?
CM BRADDY: This is Theo
I completely agree with everything  Sascha just stated
He was a kind, gentle man
who just continued to  pursue his objectives
in a way that he demonstrated power but yet a  great kind of gentleness.
And I just appreciated that in him, and he  will thoroughly be missed.
AC GORDON: Thank you so much, Theo.
Anything else from the Council?
If not,
Then the last order
or the last thing I'd like to say--
there are some accessibility issues.
For anyone who needs the  interpreters,
please go ahead and pin the interpreters.
The current interpreter
is Samantha.  I, Claudia Gordon,
am also a signer and I am  signing right now.
So you can pin me as well.
But also, in regards
to Andrés, I am pleased to announce that the Executive Committee met
and had a discussion about how we can best honor Andrés' legacy
just to ensure that we continue his work
and his commitment to health equity.
So we have decided to establish
a new NCD award
in memory of Andrés and it's called the
Andrés Gallegos  Health Care Access Award.
And this is to honor his memory.
With this particular award,
we intend to regularly recognize
and also elevate attention
towards individuals and institutions,
as well as organizations
that are making a significant contribution
to this particular
cause for more equitable
health care for persons with disabilities.
And as you well know,
I don't have to tell you
you're eyewitnesses to the fact that
Andrés’ greatest passion
was this particular issue.
And I know the moment he was selected
Chair of this Council,
that this would be his work.
And we've seen a lot of progress
to his credit,
because of his investment and leadership
and his passion.
So I'm very excited
that we are
starting this award in his honor.
And it demonstrates NCD's
unwavering commitment to his work
going forward.
So we'd like to honor
the first recipient this year.
So you will be hearing more about this
and the process
for nominations
and voting and selection as well.
So to wrap this
segment up, I want to say again, Andrés
we will miss you.
You are with us in spirit.
Your legacy continues
through our work
and through your individual efforts
and the organizations that you represent
as well.
Now we will turn our attention
to business matters of the Council
and I would like to call for approval
for the meeting.
minutes from November 16th and 17th,
our Council meeting
that took place in Providence,
Rhode Island,
that was November 16th and 17.
So I'd like to ask for a motion
to could we have a motion
from a fellow council member?
CM BITTNER: I move.
AC GORDON: Okay.
Thank you, Sasha.
And can I have a second?
CM VOORDE: I second.
This is Emily.
AC GORDON: All right.
Thank you, Emily.
Now we'll go over
and turn this over to Ms..
Lewis for the roll call vote.
LEWIS: Thank you.
Calling on Vice Chair,
Acting Chair,
Madam Claudia Gordon.
AC GORDON: Yes.
LEWIS: Hoskie Benally?
Sascha Bittner?
CM BITTNER: Yes.
LEWIS: Theo Braddy?
CM BRADDY: Yes.
LEWIS: Noting that Shawn Kennemer is not present.
Risa Rifkind?
CM RIFKIND: Yes.
AC GORDON: Ms. Lewis, I am proxy for Shawn,
so I will go ahead and aye that.
Okay, great.
LEWIS: Neil Romano
CM Romano: Aye.
LEWIS: And lastly, Emily Voorde.
CM VOORDE: Aye.
LEWIS: Thank you.
I yield the floor back to you Vice Chair,
Acting Chair,
Madam Claudia Gordon.
AC GORDON: I just want to announce
that we did have an interpreter switch.
Vern is now the interpreter,
and Claudia Gordon
is speaking through an interpreter
offscreen.
Now we'll go on to the next order of
business, which is the financial report.
Our financial report
lead is Shawn, who is not here today.
So on his behalf,
we will have a staff member,
Keith Woods,
provide and deliver Shawn's report.
So we'll go ahead
and take a vote for that to have
that approved
the status of funds for December
31, 2023.
Keith I'll go ahead and turn it over to you.
KEITH WOODS: Thank you, Madam Acting Chair.
Our current spending is in alignment with our C.R. budget
NCD spent $826,634.
of the $1,314,775 through December 31, 2023.
Our current C.R.
goes through February 2nd, 2024.
We're right on track and awaiting a full budget
so we can properly forecast the remainder of the fiscal year.
Currently we're in the process of downgrading our office space
which will reduce our rent from $21,848 to $11,320 a month.
This will save the organization $73,696
in this fiscal year.
As always, we conservatively budgeted
1% of the budget to anti-deficiency
line item to avoid the agency becoming anti-deficient.
Key takeaways from the status
of funds: NCD is on track and spent 63% of the C.R.
budget through December 31, 2023.
To date, no funds have been spent
on policy projects.
A lot of the policy work
is going to be done in-house.
NCD is going to save $73,696 this year through the downsizing of the office space.
And we received that new C.R.
budget
through March 8, 2024, and a new amount
would be $1,682,835.
Madam Acting Chair,
would you like to motion and a vote
to approve the status of funds through December 31, 2023?
AC GORDON: This is Madam Chair.
Yes, I move
if it's appropriate, I can move to have this motion.
I can make this motion.
Do we have a motion?
CM ROMANO: So moved.
AC GORDON: Okay.
Thank you, Neil. Do we have a second?
CM BITTNER:  I'll second it.
AC GORDON: Okay.
Perfect.
Thank you, Neil.
And thank you, Sascha.
We'll do a quick vote.
LEWIS: Calling on Vice Chair,
Acting Chair Madam Claudia Gordon?
AC GORDON: Aye. Yes.
LEWIS: Hoskie Benally?
Okay, we're still having issues with Mr.
Benally. Sascha Bittner?
CM BITTNER: Yes.
LEWIS: Theo Braddy?
CM BRADDY: Yes.
LEWIS: Shawn Kennemer?
His proxy?
AC GORDON: Aye. Yes.
LEWIS: Risa Rifkind?
CM RIFKIND: Aye.
LEWIS: Neil Romano?
CM ROMANO: Aye.
LEWIS: And lastly, Emily Voorde.
CM VOORDE: Aye.
LEWIS: I yield the floor back to you
Vice Chair Acting Chair.
Madam Claudia Gordon.
AC GORDON: Okay.
Thank you. Perfect.
Thank you, Keith,
for your report of the status of funds.
And that's been approved by the Council.
Now as Acting Chair,
I know we've lost a lot of time
with the troubleshooting
some access issues,
so I'm going to kind of condense my report
to make up for time that was lost.
I'd like to thank
everyone for their patience
and thank you to
the Council members
for your patience as well
and helping us troubleshoot this issue.
I think it's appropriate
at the top of my remarks as vice chair
for this report,
just to share some staff updates
that were shared with me earlier this week.
Later this month,
a longtime staff
member will be departing NCD.
Lisa has been with us for many years.
This is Lisa Grubb
and will be leaving her role
to retirement.
And unfortunately
this is due to some health issues.
So I think it's important to take a moment
publicly to recognize Lisa
and to thank her for her contributions
to NCD over her tenure.
Lisa has worked with NCD twice
in two separate
capacities, in two separate terms
in 2007 to November of 2012,
and then again July 2014 to the present.
She has been promoted
several times during her tenure
with the Council
and also served as executive director
under former Chair Neil Romano.
And this was during
the previous administration.
I'd like to ask members of the team
to give thanks
because Lisa has really been operational
in helping us establish so many
factors here at NCD,
helping us get compliant
with federal regulations.
And we are a small agency.
So those successes
and those accomplishments,
that Lisa has done have been very
essential to the function of NCD.
And Lisa is here with us today.
And I'd just like to say on behalf
of our fellow Council members
and myself, thank you
tremendously for your public service
to the American people
throughout your time at NCD.
If we could give Lisa a round of applause.
Lisa Grubb,
Thank you very much.
The other thing that I wanted to mention,
I wanted to recognize a staff member
at NCD who has been working so hard to transition
the agency’s website,
A lot of reports, a lot of material and publications
that had to be uploaded
and made web accessible.
It was a huge undertaking
and that was done by my Nick Sabula.
So I want to thank Nick for demonstrating
such great leadership in this effort.
This started with first
assessing our accessibility of our website
with Neil as well,
and Nick was able to take on that work
and keep forging ahead with it.
And finally, it has been completed
and I just want to recognize Nick
for all of his efforts
in getting the website,
the new website up and running.
So we can also applaud that.
Now, in my role as the
acting chair and vice chair
I will direct you towards Anne and the staff.
I think it's important that we continue
to focus on the work that we talked about
earlier from former Chair Andrés Gallegos
and make health equity a priority
during the rest of my term here at NCD.
Many of you are aware of emerging issues
within the executive branch
and possible changes on how they count.
folks with disabilities.
We did have a meeting
with the executive branch.
It was a very productive meeting
with the Census Bureau
and our concerns were proposed
and it was great
to be able to hear from them
and you will hear from them later
on during this meeting today.
A lot of positive changes are coming forth
this week and I'm really grateful
to the partnership.
We are really grateful to the partnership
because they heard our voices.
Your voices.
Oher issues.
We are reviewing some proposals
for future meetings,
virtual and in-person.
What policies should we address
for the upcoming year?
As we are approaching the May meeting?
There will be a time for us
to vote on the issues
that we want to bring up.
So I've asked the fellow Council members
to start engaging with each of us,
each of our respective communities,
to get a pulse
on what are some timely
issues that we should prioritize
as a council
that we can focus on
perhaps for the May meeting
and going forward.
So I encourage my fellow Council members
to engage with your communities
and bring back the ideas and suggestions
and potential policy priorities
that we can address
as a council and bring those
forward for the May meeting.
We also talked about funding.
We haven't had consistent funding.
We have continuing resolutions
and it's been hard
to kind of plan our meetings in person
because we're not always sure we have the
right amount of funds
available to support travel
and everything else
that comes along with in-person meetings.
We're still not sure what future meetings,
if we’ll be able to host them in-person,
but we are exploring the possibility
of having a smaller connect
where we are able to go out
and reach the community
instead of having the entire Council.
And that was something that Andrés
really wanted,
specifically
in visiting Indigenous land as well.
So we'll talk more about that
as we discuss
this more internally as a council.
Let me see if I missed anything.
I think my report
might be done.
I will give it over
to the Council members
to provide any brief comments.
If we can do a time check regarding
any activities that your communities--
you’ve engaged in
with your communities since November
that you’d like to share with the Council
or things that you were hearing
or picking up within the communities?
EX DIR SOMMERS MCINTOSH: Madam Chair,
I apologize,
this is Ann Sommers McIntosh.
I apologize for interrupting.
We inadvertently skipped our governance
report during the executive committee,
and I have been advised
that we do need to return to that
to memorialize the financial votes
of the executive committee.
So if we can do that briefly
before we return
to the community report
outs from the Council members,
the governance report
will be provided by Sascha Bittner.
AC GORDON: Sascha, you have the floor.
CM BITTNER:
Council members.
as the Governance Chair.
I'm  required to memorialize for the record
Any votes taken by the full Council.
Between Council meetings.
For the record.
I am memorializing.
The electronic vote.
Of the National Council on Disability.
To close this meeting
at the conclusion of the public portion
of the meeting.
For a short period.
Pursuant to the exceptions, the Sunshine Act.
And I am also memorializing.
For the record.
The online vote.
Of the council.
To approve the continuing resolution
budget.
Through February 2nd, 2024,
Thank you.
And I'm done.
AC GORDON: All right,
So if there is no vote required,
we will return to where we left off
in our agenda with Council members.
The floor is open to you to share briefly
about your engagements and interactions
with your respective communities.
Who wants to start?
So don't make me call on someone.
CM BRADDY: I'll be happy to go.
AC GORDON: Theo I see you.
I saw you at the White House.
CM BRADDY: Yeah. We had a great time.
We had a really good time.
Thank  you for coming up and tapping me.
Okay, a
couple of things.
And actually,
you sort of brought this up, Madam Chair,
in regard to.
I brought this up before.
Before, and it didn't get approved,
but I'm still hearing
about disability equity education.
Right.
I still believe and I'm hearing
from a lot of people
that ableism is our greatest challenge.
Right.
And it affects us in all kinds of areas,
in walks
of life, education, health care.
We all have been talking about that
transportation,
housing, ableism affect all of that.
And one of the things that we did here in
Pennsylvania was in 2003,
we got a curriculum, the disability
inclusive curriculum passed.
And and it started in 2003
as a great product.
It was a great model.
I suggested prior year ago that we we
we bring it
and make it one of our proposed projects
to try to make it statewide.
And so again, I'm just hearing a lot about
how important
it is to eradicate ableism.
And it is again,
it's our greatest challenge.
So in order to address it,
we need to start early
and we certainly need to start in schools.
Right.
And so, again, I just wanted to report
about the disability equality
in education curriculum and how important it is
and how we should work toward
making that a national model.
For all the good work, I want to shout out
to Alan Holdsworth and Lisa Aquila
in Pennsylvania for getting that done
and hopefully I can bring it up again.
So we Council can consider it.
Thank you.
AC GORDON: Thank you Theo.
Greatly appreciate your update.
Anyone else, any other council members like to take a moment or two to share
CM BITTNER:  I have a report.
Annika, do you want to read part of it for me.
Since our last meeting in November,
I have been doing my usual work
as previously shared, especially advocacy
on behalf of home
care providers and employers
and self-determination for people
with developmental disabilities.
There is a new development in California
I would like to highlight
since we are dealing with a huge budgetary
shortfall,
our governor is proposing
delaying the pay increases
for direct support personnel who work
with people with intellectual disabilities
and developmental disabilities that were
supposed to be implemented this year.
According to the California Community
Living Network,
a developmental disability policy advocacy
nonprofit, the state's own 2019
rate study showed
California was underfunding the system
by $1.8 billion,
which makes this proposed
delay in implementation very concerning.
It, certainly won't help.
The existing long delays.
In needed services.
That people with developmental disabilities face.
When they need to see their caseworkers.
And that is all.
Thank you.
AC GORDON: Yes, thank you.
Sasha. Anyone else?
CM ROMANO:  Madam Chair?
Neil Romano
AC GORDON: Go ahead, Neil.
Thank you.
CM ROMANO:  Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Still, as always,
in my area, employment still is an issue.
Employment of people with disabilities.
There is a great fear
that even though employment has trended
well in the last few years for people
with disabilities, we still have
a lack of understanding
in the area of sheltered workshops,
especially in some of the areas
that relate to tax policy,
which we'll talk about a great deal
further.
That's one area
that just never seems to go away,
finding people that are continuously.
Recently
did a film with an organization about 14 C
and it appears to even by some of the
standards of the Department of Labor,
has seemed to creep up a little bit more,
something we always have
to keep an eye on.
The second thing is
an independent insurance
agency, group
group insurance out in the West
discovered that
many people with disabilities,
especially people who are blind
and or Deaf, are not aware of
anything
beyond the Social Security benefits,
the Medicare and Medicaid benefits
that could be available to them.
And it's primarily
because of a lack of information
and a lack of having
any interpreting services
for people to deal with people in
just about every field.
So that is a continuing problem, but
very significant, especially for people
who are Deaf and blind,
who are reporting rates of not knowing
anything beyond Social Security
in the 75 to 95% ratio.
So it's something to take,
you know, consider,
you know, having agencies
look at how they give information
beyond just written thank you.
AC GORDON: Thank you.
Thank you, Neil.
I see Emily and then we'll go to Risa.
Please go ahead, Emily.
CM VOORDE: Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Vice chair, this is Emily Voorde speaking.
The issue that I have heard most
discussed since our last Council meeting
has been access to the vote and
instances of voter suppression in states
across the country by
states and parties, but also,
you know, direct suppression
of the vote of persons with disabilities.
And a recent report
from Rutgers University
found that 14% of voters with disabilities
had some difficulty voting in 2022.
We also know
that eight states do elections
entirely by mail, 28 states offer no excuse absentee voting.
The rest of states provide, necessitate that you provide an excuse
to qualify for absentee mail ballots.
The lack of access to those absentee
voting to that absentee
voting and voting by mail
is significantly inhibiting access
to the votes, whether that be
participation in municipal, local elections,
or state and federal elections.
Given the impending
election cycle and the presidential
primaries
currently occurring, the federal election,
the general forthcoming,
this is of great concern
to communities
with disabilities, particularly mine here
in Indiana, in the Midwest.
So something I wanted to raise
and that I hope
we're able to address further, discuss further in future meetings.
AC GORDON: Thank you, Emily, for bringing up that issue.
I believe we have.
Risa, do you have anything you'd like
to add from your your brief interactions
in thecommunity?
Don't mean to put you on the spot.
CM RIFKIND: Not at all.
I knew it was coming on the agenda and I'm happy to report out.
But I am happy Emily went before me
because I was also going to bring up,
you know, this cynical,
you know, issue of voting access,
knowing particularly this year elections
that have started, primaries and caucus.
So, Emily, thank you.
for summing it up with the data
and new polling.
And, you know,
there are so many organizations
who are working on this issue right now.
And, you know,
if it's a situation in which
I feel like we will know more,
we go along about the type of improvement,
what has been happening.
But we also already are seeing, you know,
the issue of voter suppression
discrimination, etc..
And so time is running out to make
those changes is what I've been hearing
from community members.
So I'll keep it short and brief.
And thank you,
Madam Chairman. Acting Chairman.
AC GORODN: Thank you, Risa, and thank you all for sharing.
I greatly appreciate the work
that you are doing in each of your own
communities,
in your daily jobs and your work
that tie back to your important role
here on this council.
So thank you.
Let me take a moment
to briefly look at the agenda.
Okay.
Now we are moving into two presentations
we have for today.
The first presentation
being from a representative
from the Census Bureau.
But before we get into that,
I'd like to take a moment to acknowledge
and to thank
Ana
Torres-Davis,
she is a senior attorney advisor with NCD,
and we want to take a moment to recognize
her work on this specific issue.
Her work has been tremendous.
She has been in leadership
roles in research.
She has brought stakeholders together
for further analysis of
the Census Bureau's proposal,
which is changing how they
collect data on disability.
Currently, the ACA
American Communities Analytics
has several people with disabilities
currently tracked
by the American Community Survey.
Currently, the Bureau estimates
that 14% of people in the U.S.
have a disability.
A change has been proposed
that will reduce this number
by almost 40%.
This is obviously a critical issue
in our community,
in many of our organizations and here NCD,
we have expressed our concerns
to the Census Bureau.
We need to have a voice in this process.
This has the potential
to cause so much harm to the disability
community.
A lower count will impact state programs,
safety and security
for people with disabilities and more.
We have met with the Census Bureau
head.
We have also submitted comments
and we have asked them
to pause this process,
to pause this change, and to take time
to listen to the community
and take a more thoughtful approach.
This week, as I mentioned earlier,
the Census Bureau announced
that they are pausing this change.
They will not deploy this change in 2025.
We are grateful that today
we have two representatives here
from the Census Bureau
to tell us more about these changes
and about the introductions.
We have with us today, Tasha Boone,
who is the assistant director
for the Decennial Census Program.
We also have with us
Julie
Julie Weeks.
Julie is the chief
of the Measures Research and Evaluation
Branch Division of Analysis
and Epidemiology at the National Center
for Health Statistics.
Welcome to each of you, Tasha.
Thank you.
Thank you,
both of you, for being with us here today.
As we've shared earlier
in the meeting,
we had had some accessibility issues.
If anyone has any accessibility issues
during this presentation, please do
let us know.
Feel free to put your message in the chat
or send me a text message.
Thank you, Tasha and Julie.
TASHA BOONE: Thank you and good afternoon.
I really appreciate being here
with you today.
And so does Julie,
who has joined us.
With the Census Bureau
being from NCHS
and we really appreciate the opportunity
to continue the conversation with you all
about this important topic.
Donna cannot be here today.
She was invited to speak at a second
meeting with the White House,
Office of Public Engagement,
about what we're doing around this topic.
So we're having lots of conversations.
So good news.
Thank you for saying already
that we released the blog
on this Tuesday,
and it was because we heard you
lots of engagement, lots of discussion.
Through.
Questions, meetings,
the FRN process
where we heard a lot of public feedback.
So in conjunction with
the National Center
for Health and Statistics
and OMB,
we decided obviously to not move
forward with the disability questions for collection
year 2025.
But what we do want to do
is continue to engage with all of you
people from the national federal agencies
as well as individuals
and communities representing
this community, so we can continue
the conversation about addressing
the needs and concerns for the community.
So with that said,
today, we would like to cover
some important background and context
and some next steps to move forward.
So we'll cover a couple of items.
One, the core for the Census
Bureau's mission
is that through our survey and censuses,
we captured critical information
for the nation
to help decision
makers make the best decisions.
And that means that we need to ensure
our data
is of the highest possible quality.
And there are many ways that we do that.
The most critical
is making sure that we reach
as many people as possible
to ensure they are seen and heard
through our censuses and surveys.
So there are three important values
to that that we hold dear
scientific integrity to ensure
we're using the best science
for the work that we're trying to achieve.
Relevancy.
Collect relevant data
based on the needs of the community.
And that's what
we've been hearing a lot from you about
transparency, is ensuring
that we're sharing our process
with our stakeholders.
And a big part of this is about
our governance process as well.
The ACS is a mechanism
to help us to achieve this mission.
In order
to get on the ACS, a federal agency
must demonstrate a statutory, regulatory,
or policy need.
Since we posted the FRN,
we received over 12,000 comments.
So many of you submitted
lots of good information to us
through this process.
We have realized that the disability
community has many needs
and I just want to do quick check.
We don't see the slides and I don't know
if they were pulled down,
but I just wanted to double check on that.
LEWIS: Okay.
Tasha,  I can pull them back up.
I'm so sorry.
Are you ready now?
BOONE: Yes.
LEWIS: Okay. Will do. Thank you so much.
BOONE: Thank you.
And so just
so that people know where we are.
Slide to the next slide.
I think I was just about to cover
a few topics.
Not perfect.
We go back one.
We will have.
What we wanted to discuss with you today.
Are concerns
raised about the proposed changes?
Why we are asking this question and
what this question covers.
Where are we in the process
and next steps related to disability data.
So you can stay right here on this slide
because I'm hoping that much of this
will address the concerns
that you mentioned in the letter
that you wrote to the Census Bureau.
So why does the access include questions
on functioning disability?
The access collects this information
to help enforce
and ensure that we have laws
and regulations and policies.
The information provides a consistent approach
with international organizations
for the disability measurement
based on our content review in 2014,
there are 12 federal agencies
that have demonstrated a programmatic need
for this particular question.
Next slide.
So how do the changes get on the ACS?
As many of you know,
the American Community Survey
is a key data source
for numerous federal statistical agencies
and other executive branch agencies.
And obviously,
many of you and your organizations
use a lot of this data as well.
I talked about scientific integrity
and some of the things
that support that rigor are to ensure
we have the best science available,
such as changes
to the ACS that have to follow
a prescribed process and proposals
and must meet specific decision criteria.
A federal agency, government agency
has to justify a need
for a new survey measurement
on a specific topic,
and there is no other sources
that could reasonably
meet that information.
With that said,
I'll turn it over to Julie
to cover the next three slides
and then I'll come back
to just highlight our decision
and then cover some of the stakeholder
next steps that we have going on.
And then we'll wrap up and have questions.
Julie?
JULIE WEEKS: Thanks, Tasha.
Next slide, please.
Hello, everyone.
One of the things that I want to do right off
the bat is kind of underscore
that for many of you,
you've heard this information.
A lot of it is background
and has been provided
in different contexts
and different meetings.
But if you haven't,
then I'd like to just start
by saying that one of things
that I want to highlight is the space
in which this work is being done
is that of officials statistics.
So those that are collected
that must meet standards for definition
measurement and national, international
reporting purposes,
Those processes generally
and a substantial portion
of what is collected for official
statistical purposes is produced by the 13
agencies that have statistical work
as their principal mission.
And the National Center for Health
Statistics is one of those.
So on this slide, I simply want to mention
that what the justification
I'm seeing a caption
that says we need to pause is that
is that for me?
AC GORDON: Yes. We will take a quick moment.
We are seeing that the caption here
has had a technical issue
with a bad cable and the questioner
needs 2 minutes to get back on line.
So we'll take a quick pause
and my apologies.
We will just take a quick part
of the caption time.
All right.
We will move forward
with our presentation.
Again, thank you for your patience.
And then we will open up a time, a brief
discussion for our council members.
So Tasha and Julie
from the U.S.
Census, thank you so much.
Please continue your presentation.
WEEKS: Okay.
I'm going to wait
till the slides are up on the screen.
Okay.
So let me continue with
where we are in terms
of the justification for the proposal
to change the content,
the disability content
in the American Community Survey
and what was part of that proposal.
So first and foremost,
the measurement of disability
had to be conceptualized in a manner
that was consistent with the international
and national standards.
WHO's international classification
of functioning disability and health,
which is endorsed by UN and member
countries, but also here in the U.S.
by the National Institutes of Health,
the Department of Health
and Human
Services, the Centers for Disease Control
all use a functional approach
to collect information
to assess disability. So
any new content had to consider
or to be in alignment conceptually
with those current models and measures.
This was what was necessary
to meet a number of requirements.
Now, tangentially, I understand that
may not be sufficient for other purposes
and for other data collections
that do not have these requirements.
For example, the ACS can serve
as a platform for six questions.
There are more than 40 questions
on the National Health Interview survey.
For example.
But for this purpose,
that was one of the requirements.
NCHS has a programmatic mandate
to collect detailed information
on health, functioning and disability
and the National Health Survey Act of 1956
sets that requirement and authorizes
the NHIS, the National Health Interview
Survey to do that.
So insofar as the proposal aligned
with that current content
that is also on the HIS,
that was an important
justification piece as well.
Next, and to meet the
needs for more detailed information
on health
risks, behaviors,
care access and utilization
NCHS and our data users
need more detailed information
on functioning
than what a dichotomy can provide.
So The information that is the severity
was far more important than just
the presence of a functional difficulty.
So in the same way, for example,
that the experience of disability
is not a dichotomy,
nor can be the policies
and programs that are designed
to support people with disabilities.
We need to collect information
that informs
the continuum of experiences.
It was important that we consider
harmonization across data collections
in such a way
to ensure that the standards are used
for the collection of information.
Part of that impetus
for the proposed change was to ensure
that the American Community Survey
is collecting functioning and disability
data in a manner that's consistent
with other federal surveys
such as the Census Pulse,
the National Survey of Family Growth,
the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey,
not only
with those federal data collections,
but also all of the sponsored
data collections by USAID,
the World Bank and multiple U.N.
agencies.
So the revision would really bring us
into compliance
with the measurement requirements
set out by the international community,
which has adopted those six questions
since 2006.
The revision would ensure
that our obligations under the UN
standards
for censuses and population surveys
and for international reporting
requirements such as the Sustainable
Development Goals would be met.
It's also important
because it provides the data needed,
for example, in the Department of Health
and Human Services,
where we make international comparisons
in the health People program.
For example,
if you're familiar with that program,
we use that measure of disability
to track our ten year goals
for the nation's health and well-being.
Next slide, please.
So I don't want to spend
a whole bunch of time on this slide.
However, given that in Tasha's portion,
she highlighted the fact that proposals
to change
the ACS content must also demonstrate
adequate development and testing.
This was the information that was provided
as part of the proposal process.
So prior to being endorsed by the U.N.,
the Washington Group
questions were both cognitively
and field tested
in multiple rounds and languages
and over a dozen two dozen countries.
And to date, there are about 125
countries who use the six questions,
and many of those
are actually using the longer 37
question set,
which is called the extended set.
And that extended set asks
additional domains
of functioning,
such as anxiety depression, upper body
functioning, pain and fatigue,
which are especially important
given the relationship of these symptoms
to the experience of chronic conditions.
Next slide.
For the next great.
Again, many of you are aware
of the proposed change.
So very succinctly,
the change that was proposed in 2018
sets out three changes.
It eliminates the word
serious, allowing respondents,
as I mentioned before,
to report a greater variability
and functional difficulties.
The revision also eliminates the words
Deaf and Blind,
as those terms are known to be sensitive
and not endorsed widely
or consistently across respondents.
And finally, the proposed set would use
a graded response set to capture more
detailed information on severity,
allowing for combinations
of response patterns.
It also adds a question
on a communication,
which is fairly important.
Functional,
especially among the population
with intellectual
and developmental disabilities.
So that's the proposal.
The justifications meeting,
the criteria that is set out by the ICSP.
I'm going to turn it back to Tasha.
BOONE: Thank you, Julie.
We'll go to the next slide.
I appreciate you covering that background.
It's very helpful
to understand how we arrived here.
I'm going to take us through
just very quickly
the process, as we've already talked about
and that’s what this slide lays out for you,
is that length of time and the governance
that's involved
to ensure that the question
that is proposed or questions
that are put on the ACS
do follow a rigorous process.
Julie just alluded to some of that.
We have proposals.
We have the cognitive testing.
We have field tasks that we do
in order to determine
how this question or questions work.
And then we do the evaluation.
Again, we're following this process
for every single question
and or questions
that are proposed for the ACS.
We always go out to the public
to solicit feedback.
Unprecedented in the history of the ACS
I think we got a lot of
feedback, as you well know,
from the
public and from organizations
such as yourself
to provide feedback on the questions
that we were proposing for disability.
And so after, as you know,
careful evaluation on our decision point
at this point in
time is not to move forward
with the proposed questions.
Even though Julie laid out
the justifications of why?
Because we do recognize
that it's a broader
understanding that needs to be had about
the full landscape of the needs.
So when I go to the next slide
and talk a little bit
about what some of those 12,000 comments
kind of encapsulated.
There is a need for more
comprehensive public engagement
that was identified
and we're doing that,. Part of
that is what we're doing today
and will continue to
to do. In the next slide, which I think
is the next two slides
that my final slides
I'll talk very quickly
about what we plan on doing.
if you don't mind going back to the next
slide--the previous slide, sorry.
And the other concerns that
were laid out
is that existing and proposed questions
do not include more or all types
of disabilities.
Concern regarding break in series
A gap in the data
availability and comparisons
across  measures. Request for more estimates that reflect
the WG-SS graded
response categories,
including no difficulty,
some difficulty,
a lot of difficulty and cannot do at all.
There is also request
for a different cutoff
concerned that the proposed
use of the international standard cutoff
for disability, which does not include
people reporting some difficulty,
would decrease the estimate of people
living with disabilities.
And there is also a concern
that the proposed change in data
would impact program funding and services.
So the next slide,
what have we been doing
since we heard all of this feedback?
We have analyzed the feedback.
Obviously,
we had several engagements
and some of them
went back to September year
where we first
presented at our scientific sense
the scientific advisory Committee, where
this public about the proposed changes.
Then in November
we met with our National advisory
committee, also public and talked about it there.
We received feedback from both of those.
Then December 6, we had a briefing with
many different organizations
that was hosted by the Leadership
Conference Coalition
and got a lot of feedback there.
And then December 8th
our director met
with a few organizations,
including your own.
December 14th,
we did a presentation with the White House
and talked about aging
and disability
with the aging and disability community.
And then January 19th.
Census and NCHS
The staff on the Senate Subcommittee
on Health, Education,
Labor and Pensions
and the Subcommittee on Aging.
And they talked a lot of also about the
proposed changes and their needs.
And then February 8th today, obviously
a meeting with you
and I mentioned that Donna Daley
is the division chief
of the American Community Survey,
was meeting with the White House
at the same time.
And, of course,
we received lots of letters
in addition to what was submitted
through the FRN process.
And then we're continuing and have been
meeting with other federal agencies.
And then, of course the ICSP.
Next slide.
So where we are today? Obviously
we received comments, the 12,000 comments
from over 150 organizations,
20 local and state governmental groups,
over 300 people
with university affiliation.
Of course, thousands of people
with disabilities also wrote in
and gave comments, and we received
comments from federal agencies.
Some are part of the Disability
Interagency Subcommittee
and some
that were not part of this committee.
So where are we?
One, the things that I said
at the top of the presentation
is that we heard you
and that we fully recognize
through all of this feedback
that there's a need to really understand
all the uses and purposes
for this particular data.
What are people
trying to do with this data?
What is the that they need to
in order to achieve those needs?
And we recognize that the asks questions
are not the for answer to that.
So we want to understand
the full landscape of that
and be able to come together with you
and other organizations like yourselves
in order to talk with the federal agencies
and have a conversation
so that we're understanding
and hearing from each other
so we can do the evaluation and understand
do we currently have data
to meet those needs?
And if we don't,
then maybe we need to create some products
or new questions on surveys or censuses
in order to capture those needs
so that we can better measure
the needs for the disability community.
So that's what we plan to do in
the spring,
is have this meeting. On our last slide.
The next slide.
It just talks
about our continued engagement
that we're having.
This meeting won't be the last that we'll
have with many different organizations.
We're interested
in continuing the conversation.
You know, we just published the blog.
We're continuing our stakeholder meetings.
And this spring coming up soon,
we plan to announce
when we plan to have that meeting
and look forward to
having your participation in that meeting
so that we can work together.
And then, of course,
we will finally publish
our 30 day FRN
for this content
for the proposed content for the 2025.
It will not include
the proposed questions to disability,
but we do have other content
that we're moving forward
with other proposed changes.
And then of course, in May,
we release the final decisions on that
so that we can then move forward
with implementing the 2025
content changes, which again
will not include this proposed question.
So with that,
I think we have some time for questions
and we really want to hear from you.
So thank you very much.
Julia and I are very pleased
to have been able to have the opportunity
to present to you.
And we look forward to further engagement.
We're open for questions
and turn it back over to the moderator.
CM BRADDY: Madam Chair, I have a question.
If you allow me.
AC GORDON: Of course.
First of all, I just want to say thank you both
for your wonderful comprehensive presentation
And I wanted to thank you
for your partnership and also ask
my fellow council members to pass on our
thanks to
Census Director,
Robert Santos as well.
Please do pass on our gratitude to him.
We are so thankful that you have heard
us and heard our community.
So I will turn it over.
I know we only have a few minutes left,
but we will open it up for any questions
for my fellow council members
with questions.
Please go ahead.
CM BRADDY: Yes. Again,
thank you for that information.
And I got to ask this question.
I didn't want to, but I got to ask.
I do it a lot with my staff right.
One of the things that we try to do
is when we make a mistake,
we pause and evaluate it
so we don't make that same mistake again.
And so I'm wondering, you know, what
have you learned from making this mistake?
And maybe you can't answer that,
but it is important that
that we learn from the things that we do.
And I'm wondering
if you could talk about that for a second.
BOONE: Most certainly.
And I thank you for your question.
I think the way that we like
to look at this, like you said,
that there are lessons
learned as you go through your process.
And one of the lessons that we learned
is that we need to make sure
that we have fuller engagement,
broad and wide, with representatives
from the stakeholder communities
and organizations that have a stake
in this in these types of questions.
And so we are looking at our work
and our process
of how we continue to
get questions on the ACS.
And we're looking at that holistic process
and seeing where do we need to ensure
that we're incorporating the
more stakeholder engagement.
And so we are definitely saw
that as a need
and we are actively with our ICSP committee
to ensure that we have more robust
stakeholder engagement.
So thank you.
CM BRADDY: Awesome. Thank you.
Just need to hear that.
WEEKS: May, I add something, if that's okay.
In addition to the question
that was asked from Theo,
AC GORDON: Please do. Thank you, Julie.
WEEKS: Okay Of course, I think this is
rather important.
There were lots of lessons learned.
And I will I will mention one that
we have not been able to get to
in a lot of these conversations,
and I think it's very important
right now
we're we're trying to to set the stage.
And like I said, I apologized at the
beginning because many of you have heard
some of what we just presented and we're
trying to get everyone at the same place.
And that's really important.
But one of the lessons learned is
and some us needed to hear this
more than others.
I mean, we certainly know there there are
many needs for data on disability.
And I think
one of the most important point,
you know, points for this
this coming year that
that will be important
is is hearing those needs
and I would
I would invite the community to come with
how do you use the data
please
What are the give us
examples of where the data kind of draws
a very specific line to resources
so that we ourselves
can use those examples
and leverage that knowledge
in our own work here.
And I would say
if there are needs for data
that aren't collected through the ACS,
let's see if they are collected
elsewhere in these very large
nationally representative surveys
that have a lot more space.
And those three topics to me
are some of the more robust
and fruitful conversations
that I'd very much like to get
during these engagements.
So I, I really
appreciate and invite
much more conversation,
especially in those areas.
Thank you
for letting
me make that additional intervention.
AC GORDON: Yes, absolutely.
Thank you very much, Julie,
for that important contribution.
Before we let you go,
I was just wondering if you would be able
to share the slide deck
that was presented from today with Ana.
at NCD for the record?
BOONE: Yes, I think we did send
and we'll just confirm that.
So that all the participant participants
can have it.
Absolutely. And again,
thank you very much.
And we do look forward to engaging
with you further, particularly
at our upcoming spring meeting.
AC GORDON: Yes, wonderful.
If nothing more from my fellow
Council members.
Then again, I can't say it enough times.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, all of you,
for a specifically Julie and Tasha
for your important work and us here at NCD
and the many disability organizations
and 22,000 commenters
will be here alongside
with you on this journey, making sure
that we get this right together.
Thank you for listening to us,
for hearing our voice,
and for hearing the voice of the community
members that have joined today.
To those community members,
I hope that you feel at ease
and know your contributions
are valuable in this process
and that the time you took to contribute
your voice had power
and has power at the individual
and collective voice.
And you should be proud
and applaud yourselves and applaud
your public servants
for doing the right things
and for advocating for our communities.
Thank you so much.
Julian, Tasha, you're welcome to stay
and we
appreciate your additional time today,
but I think you have to go.
So thank you.
Okay.
We already took our break,
so I think we can continue
into our next presentation
for today's meeting.
I just want to confirm
that our presenters are here
and that this is a good time
for us to start.
We will have today
tied to an open project on transportation.
My colleague
Emily will take the lead on this
and the next part of the agenda.
So I am very happy to turn it over to you.
Emily.
CM VOORDE: Thank you very much.
Vice-Chair Claudia and to our colleagues
from the Census Bureau.
My name is Emily.
I'm a white woman with just past shoulder
length blond hair.
And I am going to be introducing
our next panel today,
one that I am very personally
and professionally excited about.
One of NCD’s policy priorities for 2024
is the development of  reports that examine
persistent barriers to full inclusion
in independence of people with mobility
disabilities, including the current state
of ground transportation, airline
travel and public rights of way.
Three decades
after the ADA was passed, people
with mobility disabilities like myself
and many others on the call remain
extremely disadvantaged
by the current state
of ground transportation options
as the most common
forms of on demand transportation,
taxicabs and ride sharing platforms
like Uber and Lyft
are largely unavailable due to a lack
of wheelchair accessible vans.
Air travel has been plagued
by frequent damage to wheelchairs
and injuries to people with disabilities.
when on boarding and off
boarding flights. Communities
across the nation continue to inaccessible
sidewalks,
street crossings and bus stops
which prevent wheelchair users
and those with other mobility impairment
from moving safely.
through our community
help inform our report.
Today, we are honored representatives
from the US Access Board, the U.S.
Department of Transportation,
and the US Department of Justice
join us to talk about public
right of way ground
transportation and airline
travel for people with disabilities.
After the last presentation, there
will be a Q&A with our Council members.
I will ask that our panelist
be mindful of time
and know that we will try to get to
as many questions as possible.
We will start our public comment period
slightly after the 4:00 Eastern hour.
I want to just briefly introduce
our panelists.
Our first panlelsit is Juliet Shoultz,
a transportation systems engineer
and accessibility
specialist at the US Access Board.
Welcome, Juliet.
We have seen a class action lawsuit
against New York, Philadelphia
and recently in Baltimore because of impassable sidewalks,
lack of curb cuts and in general
inaccessibility of public spaces.
We're very interested in the Access
Board's recently released rule on public
right of way and how it will remedy
this persistent issue.
So, Juliet, thank you so much
for being with us here again today.
You have the floor.
JULIET SHOULTZ:  Thanks for having me.
Yes, so the Access Board finalized the public right of way  accessibility guidelines
last year in August and,
what we did is we--
the proposed rule was published in 2013.
And so over that time, ten years,
we've had a lot of input from the public.
We've had we've addressed
technical assistance questions
from designers and advocates.
And so we took all that information
and that in part informed
what the final product looks like.
So I'll highlight a few of the changes
that if you're familiar with the rule,
it's a big rule.
And what we've done is we do have
trainings on our YouTube channel
to kind of help people get acclimated
with it and those familiar with it.
There is a what's new
video that kind of highlights the changes,
but some of the things we did
is we removed the MUTCD language.
MUTCD is a transportation manual,
and we used to reference it
for, for example,
accessible pedestrian signals.
And so for ease of use and just to remove
any ambiguity about what's required
and what's optional,
we moved all of that language
into the PROWAG text itself.
So now you have this one document
that tells you everything
you need to do for accessible design.
We removed our advisory language
that we had in PROWAG.
We no longer include advisories.
The advisories are helpful,
but they're best suited for a guide
for guidance, material
and how to do things
because there was some confusion about
the advisories, mandates
or are they is it just
technical assistance?
There are some advisories that we've
included in the final rule text
as now a requirement, so our example at driveways that are yield
or stop controlled, we now require detectable warning services
and before that was just a discussion and advisory on what
to do at driveways with a yield or stop.
We have clarified the distinction
between new construction and alterations.
That was always a source of confusion.
And the reason
it's important to distinguish
the two is in new construction.
The expectation is your facilities is
quite accessible, almost fully compliant.
Then fully compliant,
whereas in alterations,
which is a lot of the work that's  done out there by DoTs,
these already have
infrastructure, buildings,
utilities, roadways, whatnot.
And so there's
some existing physical constraints.
So we wrote the text to kind of address
those concerns.
But still, even with the existing
physical constraints,
expectation
is that the facilities when altered,
are accessible
to the maximum extent feasible.
We did revise language
so that we're consistent with ADAG.
ADAG has been around
much longer as a standard.
And so we did things like for example,
the cross slope in ADAG
is 1 in 48 maximum.
And so we did the same thing in PROWAG,
and stayed consistent with ADAG.
at languages such as changes in local
versus vertical surface
discontinuities that we were referring to.
So you'll see those changes really about consistency.
Another change we made was,
I talked about the detectable warning surfaces at driveways.
We expanded the treatment options
for roundabouts.
So in the proposed rule,
there was only one option for roundabouts.
But in talking to transportation
engineers and others in industry,
we found that there was a need to expand
the treatment options
and hopefully further research will refine
if there is indeed some options
that are a lot more accessible
than others.
We added visual contrast
requirements for stairs,
and that is a new requirement.
There was an overwhelming request
for us to make that a requirement.
So at top of the stairs, tread or landing,
there needs to be a visual contrast
as best just really
a high level of what we've added,
what's in the new rule.
so the Access Board, we finalized the  guidelines
and when we finalize a set of guidelines,
there is a mandate
for the enforcing agencies
to adopt them as standards.
They can increase the accessibility,
but they cannot adopt something
that's less than what we've required.
And so that would be the next step.
We don't do it enforcing
other than at ABA facilities.
So in order for PROWAG to be enforceable under the ADA,
it would need to be adopted by Department,
Justice Department, Transportation
and ABA.
The architecture
barriers, various federal facilities,
for example, at military base,
they would need to be adopted
by Department of Defense, U.S.
Postal Service and all the other ABA agencies.
So that's really a very high level
of what's changed and what's next.
We continue to
field technical assistance
questions on the final rule.
We provide trainings. We're very busy
with doing trainings.
And like I mentioned earlier, we have the
YouTube trainings that we've provided
and hoping people will look at this
as an updated resource
and making sure there's accessible
design of the public right of way.
And I'll take questions.
CM VOORDE: Thank you so much, Juliet.
We're I believe we're actually going
to hold questions until the end
after all three of our distinguished
guests have spoken.
So if we can just pause there
and I want to introduce our second
speaker,
a good friend and a mentor,
Kelly Buckland, the disability policy
advisor in the Secretary's office
at the US Department of Transportation.
Prior to this role, was the executive director
of NICL, the National Council
on Independent Living.
Welcome, Kelly.
You're familiar
with all three of these issues
from your former at NICL
and in your current role.
We know that DOT has been very active
in this administration on air travel
issues faced by people with disabilities.
And we're interested in hearing
about DOT initiatives on these topics.
We'd also like to hear from you on your thoughts regarding ground
transportation challenges with taxis and
rideshares such as Uber and Lyft.
So with that, I'll turn it over to you.
Really good to see you.
Thanks for being with us today.
KELLY BUCKLAND: Yeah, well, thanks, Emily.
It's really good to see you, too.
And a number of my other friends. Hi Neil.
I could go on.
but I’ll stop there.
My presentation was the PowerPoint.
So what I would just request
is that maybe the PowerPoint
could be sent out to people afterwards
so they'll have it.
But I was appointed to this position
by the president in September
of 21.
So after being appointed,
I started working on a set of disability
policy priorities, and those were
then adopted by
the Secretary and the Department
on July 26th of 2022, which Emily
you attended the ADA celebration
that we did
back then and heard
about the policy priorities at that point.
So what we did and these
are on the DOTwebsite of
which is at
dot.gov/accessibility, but
what the department did was adopted
a basically four pillars
and there's different goals
under each of the pillars.
But the first one is enabling safe
and accessible air travel,
which for people with disabilities
right now
everyone knows that's
neither safe nor accessible.
So the second pillar was enabling
multi-modal accessibility of public rights of way.
The third was to enable access to good
paying jobs or business opportunities
for people with disabilities.
And the fourth was to enable accessibility
of electric vehicles,
charging and automated vehicles.
So we then had some overarching things
we also wanted to do,
which one was to reinvigorate
programmatic enforcement of the Air
Carrier Access Act,
the Americans with Disabilities Act,
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act,
Section 508 and Section 503.
We also wanted to advance
diversity, equality, inclusion,
and accessibility of the DOT.
workforce.
We wanted to address gaps in data,
on people with disabilities in transportation.
There is a huge lack of data
in transportation
on people with disabilities specifically.
And then we also wanted to make sure
that all DOT
meetings were fully accessible to people with disabilities.
and I'll give you
a little bit of an update
on each of these.
So I'm going to start with
enabling safe and accessible air travel,
and I'll probably try to end
this similarly with
with a little bit of information
about taxi cabs.
So of
the goals underneath
enabling safe and accessible
air travel were the following.
We wanted to develop
an advanced research roadmap
building off of the Access Board
and the Transportation Research Board's
report on the feasibility of
wheelchair
security systems on passenger aircraft,
which will support
future rulemaking by the department,
which would then make it a rule
that wheelchair spot
be provided on airplanes.
So the next thing
was to ensure rulemaking, to ensure
safe accommodations for air travelers
with disabilities using a wheelchair.
So we have an NPRM
that will be coming out
in the next few weeks
that will address
both the mishandling of wheelchairs
and the
unsafe handling of people with
disabilities, which results in injuries.
So the rule is going to make it a pro se
violation
of the Air Carriers
Access Act
if a wheelchair is damaged by an airline.
Right now, the wording is a little fuzzy.
So the airlines can deny that they violated the Act.
This will make it a pro se violation
And so
at that point,
they'll just automatically be found guilty
of violating the Air Carrier Access Act
and then will be subject to fines.
We also
we're going to issue a NPRM
and final rule
on accessible lavatories on single-aisle aircraft
We did that this last July.
We did issue a final rule
on accessible accessible lavatories.
There's a number of things
that are going to be required in the next
three years,
which one is to make the interior of the
of the bathrooms on single aisle
aircraft more accessible.
by providing some of the features that have to now be  accessible,
like are grab bars,
accessible water faucets, that kind of stuff.
The on board wheelchair will also need to be made --
there will be a number of different things
that will have to be done to that
to make it more accessible.
And airlines will not be able to just
defer until there's a fully accessible model.
They have to purchase the on board wheelchair
that's most accessible.
that's on the market until one more accessible becomes available.
We're also expanding
enforcement activities related to the Air
Carrier Access Act
and its implementing regulations.
You will know that
lot of people have been really frustrated.
They filed a complaint
with the Department of Transportation.
It sort of goes to the big black hole.
Nothing ever happens with it.
Nobody ever gets an answer back.
So we're trying to win back
the trust of the public
that when they file a complaint
with a department,
they know that something's going to happen
and that their complaint will
be processed.
So the department has hired
on eight new attorneys
for the air carrier or for the FAA,
consumer protection division,
as well as hiring on some more analysts
that will process the complaints.
We anticipate
getting rid of the backlog of complaints
by within the next year.
And so when somebody files a complaint,
it will just be the process of
investigating the complaint that will be taking time.
There will be no more backlog.
We've also actually brought over some detailees
to also help
with the process of the complaints.
And we want to educate people
with disabilities about their rights
under the Air Carrier Access Act and how to exercise that.
So We did release the
the airline Passengers
with Disabilities Bill of Rights.
That was done in July of 2023 as well.
So that or maybe it was a little bit
before that,
and we have kicked off
a public awareness campaign
that is being done with both disability
advocacy organizations,
instance, PVA,
Paralyzed Veterans of America
and the Airlines themselves.
So there's the Bill of Rights
is supposed to be published
in number of different places
where it's very visible and
allow people to get more information
about what
their rights are.
So on the research
roadmap, I also want to give you a
small update here.
So the FAA did
issue like a three year
research road map to answer the questions
that were in the Transportation
Research Board's report.
So they completed their first year
that was looking at wheelchairs
so that crash tested wheelchairs
and looked at wheelchairs, functionality
and that kind of stuff.
So they've pretty much come to the determination that the WC19
wheelchairs will fulfill the requirements
of a chair to be allowed onto airplanes.
And the crash testing that's done
to determine that they're WC19 chair
will be sufficient.
And as some of you may know,
WC19 chairs most people are sitting in one.
Like for instance my chair is WC19 compliant.
I don't have the travel add ons
like the handles
that are the places where you put the tie
down stuff but it's still WC 19
compliant wheelchair so that looks like
that will work this year.
They're going to be
spending time on researching
the tie down systems in airplanes,
not trying to figure out what we need,
whether it's a four-strap
restraint system, kind of like
buses use or vans use or taxes use,
or whether we can use an in-floor
kind of restraint.
like a key restraint.
So the third and final year
will be researching the restraint systems
that keep people in their chairs.
But anyway, so
we're we're at least halfway done
with The three year
roadmap of Delta Flight products
has also submitted a folding seat
to the FAA for certification.
So the seat folds up that you can then
back your wheelchair into that same spot.
And it has
it has tie down straps in that spot.
And so
the industry is also working on this.
Just want people know it's
not just DOT, but it's also industry
And HHS is doing some stuff as well around wheelchair
crash testing.
Switching slides.  Sorry.
So enabling safe and accessible air travel.
And another thing
I already mentioned the final rule on accessible lavatories,
so I won't go there again.
The Office of
Consumer Protection with the
FAA also released
travel tips for wheelchair users on its website
in order to further educate passengers with disabilities about the benefits of
sharing information in advance with the airlines about their  wheelchairs and scooters.
And we don't know if people know,
but we did reach an agreement with United
and United has in the agreement
this was to to
on the Figueroa complaint where
some of you may remember, her chair was destroyed,
she then got pressure sores ended up dying
from those pressure sores.
And so the complaint was filed
with the department.
So how the complaint was resolved
was to ask United to do a number of things.
So one of the things they're going to do
is on their websites,
they will be publishing the size of the cargo door,
so that you can tell whether or not
the dimensions will work for your chair.
Instead of showing up at the airport
and finding out your chair won’t fit on an
airplane. So
there's a number of other things
that United
is going to be doing as a result of the
agreement, too.
But they've also done
some stuff on their own, like they've
sort of provided Braille on everything and
also started providing
accessible in-flight communication
information with captioning
and even their entertainment’s captioned.
So, United is just kind of stepping it up
in some areas as well.
So I won't go through the ten
the Passenger's Bill of Rights,
but there are ten of them.
And when you get the slides
you might want to look at those,
make sure you're educated about them.
So when you fly you'll be able to
know what your rights are.
And I can answer questions later
about the rest of the stuff.
But then also
I want to move to the second priority,
which was enabling multi-modal
accessibility of public transportation
facilities, vehicles and right to work.
So we worked extensively
with the Access Board.
And when I say extensively, I mean that.
And after ten years we finally got PROWAG
adopted by the Access Board
and now it's up to DOT
to adopt PROWAG so that it can be
enforced by DOT.
So we've started the process of an NPRM,
that should actually be released
in just the next few weeks,
and we intend to complete that process
and get a final rule out
before the end of this term.
We also
with Federal Highway
sent out, I think, to all of the states
requiring them to send us their ADA
transition plans.
They're now up on a dashboard on the U.S.
DOT website.
You can look up at your state and you can
see what their ADA transition plan is.
It is
and what they've been able to complete.
We're also asking them to put up on there
how they're going to use their bipartisan
infrastructure law funds to address
the accessibility barriers
that are still there.
We will be issuing
a notice of proposed
rulemaking and a final rule
on equitable access to transit facilities
and updating the minimum guidelines.
And we've also released over
$1 Billion under the Old Stations
Accessibility Program.
We released $700 million
last December,
not December of 23, but December of 22.
And this past December now
announced another $300 million.
So there's over a billion dollars out there to address inaccessible legacy
railway stations and subway stations.
So about 15 cities got money,
but the bulk of that
is going to both Chicago and New York
because they have the most inaccessible
legacy stations still there.
We're also working really closely with and
have been since I got here with Amtrak,
and they have brought into compliance
a number of Amtrak stations
and are working on at least 11 more
or at least 11
more this year
and are working on a number for next year.
I have to say I had some pretty
negative
opinions of Amtrak
and those have all been changed.
I mean, they really have stepped up.
And I'm actually really proud of
a lot of the work that Amtrak is doing.
They've made a complete culture change
and they've really become
really committed to making this,
making their services accessible.
We've also been working with them on
the design of new rail states for new rail
cars, for both the regional trains
and the long haul trains.
Those are all going to be replaced
and the new cars are going to be
incredibly more accessible
than the ones that we currently have.
As a matter of fact,
you'll be able to go from car to car
and on the long haul trains
you'll be able to go to the observation
car and the dining car
by going from one car to another,
and there'll be elevators
will take you up to the second
level of the long haul cars.
So the whole rail situation is going to change a lot.
The only unfortunate part here is that it
takes a while to build trains,
so that you won't see them on the tracks
for another 5 to 10 years.
You could see some more about
that in my slides, but
I want to move on to
enabling good
paying jobs and business opportunities.
We incorporated language
on encouraging hiring of people disabilities
in all of our grant
notices of funding opportunities
and our explanatory materials
and require them to comply with the ADA,
comply with Section 504, 508
and 503, meaning that
they're all federal contractors
and their subcontractors
will have to try to meet
that 7% aspiration goal
within DOL's
rules.
And we incorporated standard language
on encouraging the hiring
of people with disabilities in all of our DoT contracts.
And we're coordinating
with other federal agencies on regulatory
policy actions to expand the broadband
because we are also
affected by the Inflation Reduction Act,
and get some of those funding.
So we're going to be working on
increasing broadband access as well.
And the last one
and like I say, there's more information,
but you'll see it when you get the slides that I'm sending.
But on the last one
is to adopt or enable accessibility of
electric vehicle
charging and automated vehicles.
We worked with the Access Board
to develop, in fact at my request,
they really took up the mantle
and developed the set of accessibility guidelines
for, electric charging stations.
As you probably know,
the bipartisan infrastructure law
provides funding for a half
a million charging stations
across the country.
So we're going to be building over 500,000
charging stations.
We also just released funding
to repair charging stations
that are no longer functional.
And if somebody receives funding to repair
an existing charging station,
they then have to bring it
into all of the department's
compliance requirements,
including the accessibility requirement.
So even those charging stations will now
be retrofitted so that they're accessible.
What we did is started enforcing
the Access Boards guidelines
that they put out,
and now we've been working with them to
get the NPRM out so that we can start
making the accessibility requirements
in electric fueling stations.
A like a mandatory thing
under the Americans with Disabilities Act.
I just have one final thing, and that is
the department does have an
equity plan required by the White House
and not only is disability
prominent in the equity plan,
but it's really clear that disability
equity is a priority for the department.
And I really just want to end by saying that
this is my first time
ever being a federal employee.
And to be honest,
I had real trepidations about
whether I wanted to work
for the federal government or not.
I was afraid I'd be put in a position
and not allowed to do anything.
And I have to say that I have a wonderful
boss.
Secretary Pete is one of the best guys
in the world to work for
and I have been having a lot of fun
being here because
they're letting me get so much done.
So we are looking forward in this next year
to making a lot more changes.
Lastly,
I want to address the taxicab thing
because we addressed a lot of stuff
in these priorities and it's a very
it was a very aggressive plan
and we plan to complete them
by the end of this following year.
But well, all except for the wheelchair
spot on airplanes.
It's going to go well into 2025.
But I think the transportation
that I get the most complaints about
and everybody thinks sucks is paratransit.
Paratransit doesn't really work
for very people at all.
There's a small segment of the population,
I think
usually people who
are still living with their parents and their parents
actually are the ones that are satisfied with paratransit.
I’m not sure how many of the people
with disabilities actually are,
But it doesn't work well for everybody.
So that's been a real problem.
The unfortunate thing with DOT.
is that we do not
fund paratransit,
we fund vehicles for paratransit.
We don't really fund paratransit.
So we don't have too much to say about it,
but we do also issue a rule on
how they're supposed to be operated.
And so we are going to be looking at
and you'll probably see an announcement
that we're going to be putting out
a request for information, asking people
to chime in about paratransit.
One of the things that we are
probably going propose is making it
a same day service
instead of 24 hours in advance.
There's a number of other things
that we're probably going to propose.
But anyway,
so the option to paratransit
for a lot of people is the cabs.
And the port looked at the port
at the Americans
with Disabilities Act back
after it was first
passed in 1990.
And a lot of people who are as old as I am
will remember, when we passed the ADA
really paratransit was just to get us
until all the busses were accessible.
And then we figured everybody would ride
the bus.
But that's not how it's working out.
So we're
going to need to see how we can address
paratransit to make it a better system.
But they also looked at taxi cabs and.
I think from talking to people
within the department, really,
they made the decision
not to require lifts or ramps on taxi cabs
unless they purchase a van
because they didn't have enough.
I think they felt like
they didn't have enough
expert expertise or experience or
the law was not clear enough
to make them feel like
they could make taxi cabs
to be required to be accessible.
And they getting a huge amount of pressure
and pushback
from the taxicab industry, which back then
you remember that Uber and Lyft did not.
They did not exist yet.
And so taxi cabs were really
the only service like them.
And I shared with Ana, the
the little one pager
that sort of describes
what the department's decision was.
It's the preamble to the rule.
So Ana if you could send
that as well as the slides that I sent you,
if you send those to the Council members,
I would much appreciate it.
And then with that, Emily,
I'm going to turn it back to you.
CM VOORDE: Fantastic.
Kelly, thank you so, so much genuinely
for the work that you're doing
and for that really robust update.
We have one final presenter
and then we will open up to the Council
for questions.
As a reminder, we have until 410 Eastern
time for both of those pieces.
So about 15 minutes, at which point
we will pivot to our public comment
portion of the meeting.
And so our third,
but not certainly not least
last but not least panelist is Matthew Faiella,
a trial attorney in the disability rights
section of the US Department of Justice
Civil Rights Division. NCD continues
to hear from the community
that it's very difficult or impossible
even to get wheelchair accessible
taxicabs and wheelchair accessible Ubers or Lyfts.
NCD staff and Council members
also experience this when we travel.
We're interested in hearing what
federal law requires of taxi companies and
companies like Uber and Lyft with regard
to providing wheelchair accessible vans
and the rights of people with mobility disabilities.
We know, Matt, that you have been
greatly involved in this work.
So we thank you and we thank you for your time here today.
I'll turn it over to you.
MATTHEW FAIELLA: Great.
Thank you so much, Emily.
And thank you to Kelly and Juliett for your presentations.
I'm very honored to be here
and I will try to go as quickly as I can.
First of all, I'll introduce myself, I'm Matt Faiella from DOJ.
I am a white I have brown hair, I'm
wearing a suit, and I have a blurred white
background behind me.
I am a trial attorney in the disability
rights section
or DRS at the Civil Rights Division
at the Department of Justice.
And our mission at DRS is to advance
the nation's goal of equal opportunity
integration, full participation,
inclusion, independent
living and economic self-sufficiency
for people with disabilities
through enforcement,
regulation and technical assistance.
We work to do this by implementing the ADA.
Section 504, the Genetic Information
Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 or GENA,
and our enforcement, regulatory
coordination and technical assistance
activities along with innovative mediation
program to provide
our multifaceted and dynamic approach
for carrying out our mission.
Today, I'll talk a little bit about the ADA’s
general provisions that relate to transportation.
I'll talk more specifically
about the provisions that relate to taxi
companies and transportation
network companies or TNCs,
which are also known
as rideshare companies like Uber or Lyft.
I'll give some examples of our enforcement
work around taxis and TNCs,
and then I'll finally let folks know
how to report a civil rights violation
to the Department of Justice.
So to
talk about the ADA's transportation provisions,
I'll mention that Title II of the ADA applies to public entities.
It also applies to Amtrak.
So folks don't realize Amtrak falls under Title II
of the ADA as a public entity.
Title III of the ADA applies to public
accommodations or private entities.
That includes private entities
that provide transportation services,
and both US Department of Transportation
and the Department of Justice
have issued regulations under the ADA. Kelly covered a lot of that.
DOT’s ADA regulations
that are relevant to taxi companies
and TNCs can be found at Title 49
of the Code of Federal Regulations, in Parts
37 and Part 38.
Part 38 has vehicle specifications which
would relate to the types of accessibility
requirements for vehicles.
Part 37 contains some broader
nondiscrimination protections.
DOJ is responsible for enforcing Title III
of the ADA and Parts 37 and 38
of Title 49 the Code of Federal Regulations.
We've done that, and the examples
I'm about to give relate
to our enforcement of those
statutes and the regulations.
So the first example I'll talk about
is a settlement that DOJ reached
with Chariot Transit , Inc.
I'll give you a little bit of background
on the law and then I'll tell you
a little bit about the matter.
So to the regulation
that I was just mentioning
require that if a private entity
that's primarily engaged in the business
of transporting people operates
a fixed route transportation service
and purchases or releases a new vehicle
other than an automobile or van
with a seating capacity of less than eight
passengers, including the driver,
that vehicle must be readily accessible
to and usable by individuals
with disabilities,
including individuals who use wheelchairs
if it's not a fixed route system,
but rather a demand responsive system
and the transportation and the entity is
primarily engaged
in the business of transporting people
and it purchases or releases
a new vehicle other than an automobile
or van with a seating capacity
of less than eight passengers,
including the driver.
That vehicle must be readily accessible
to and usable by
individuals with disabilities,
including individuals who use wheelchairs
unless the system,
when viewed in its entirety,
meets the standard
for what we call equivalent service.
The regulations and the law
explain equivalent service
as a level of service to individuals
with disabilities, equivalent
to the level of service
provided to the general public.
And that relates to things
like response time
fares, geographic area of service, hours
and days of service,
availability of information, reservation
capability, any constraints on capacity
or service availability
or restrictions based on trip purpose.
So I know I just
spouted a lot of regulatory information.
I just wanted to be clear
what the regulations require
and how they apply,
you may have noticed
that there is this language here
about the transportation service,
purchasing or releasing a new vehicle
other than an automobile or a van
with a seating capacity of
than eight passengers,
including the driver.
So the vehicles that are at issue here
in these regulatory
provisions would be something bigger
than an eight person band.
And it has to be a new vehicle.
These are purchased
by this kind of transportation entity,
whether it's a fixed route or demand,
responsive.
So that's the regulatory and legal background.
The Chariot Transit, Inc., matter
involved a private transportation company
that provided a fixed route
and on demand service.
It also leased or owned vehicles
that were not automobiles
and did hold more than eight passengers.
The United States alleged
that Chariot did not comply with the ADA
obligations to provide equivalent service
or to have its vehicles be accessible
by doing things
like telling people with disabilities
that the company only provided service
to individuals who use wheelchairs
if they could transfer to a seat
and if there was space for the wheelchair
that did not take the seat
of another passenger.
Those who required an accessible vehicle
would only be provided
accessible resources in the region.
And so DOJ went into
a settlement agreement
after reaching out to this company,
the company agreed to begin operating
sufficient accessible vehicles
to provide passengers with disabilities
with equivalent service, to not require
passengers with disabilities.
to not require passengers with disabilities to have a different manner for booking vehicles from other passengers,
to train the company's
employees on the ADA requirements,
including requirements for accessible
vehicles and equivalent services,
and to pay the United States
the civil penalty.
That was from around
seven or eight years ago.
Chariot Transit Inc.
A little bit more recently in 2020, DOJ
reached a settlement with a transportation
network company called Lyft.
I imagine folks have heard of Lyft.
This involves allegations
that Lyft was denying rides
or otherwise engaging in discriminatory
mistreatment, making rude comments
to passengers with disabilities who use
wheelchairs or walkers or mobility aides.
The settlement agreement required
that Lyft agreed to,
require Lyft to make policy changes,
including an ADA compliant complaint
procedure to train its employees
and its drivers
in the ADA obligations to designate
an employee to coordinate ADA compliance
to refund riders and pay $10 credits
to those who make plausible complaints
of disability discrimination
to pay tens of thousands of dollars
to individuals who had been aggrieved
and complained to United States
about their mistreatment
and to pay the United States a civil penalty.
Under
that settlement agreement, not investigate
Asian.
Lyft was covered as a private entity,
entity that provides taxi services.
That's another provision within the DOT.
regulations on this matter
and under Part 37
and private entities that operate these
transportation services have to ensure
that their personnel are trained.
They have to provide their services
in a nondiscriminatory manner.
They cannot refuse to provide services
to individuals disabilities
or refuse to assist
with stowing of mobility devices.
They can't charge higher fees or fares for
carrying individuals with disabilities.
And so
here I mentioned they also have
to designate at least one individual
to ensure ADA compliance and have prompt and equitable
complaint resolution procedure.
So that was the Lyft agreement from 2020.
Then in late 2021, the United States
sued another TNC, Uber Technologies Inc.
Again, I imagine folks have heard of Uber,
Uber had a practice of and a policy
of charging what they call wait
time fees to all customers,
including customers with disabilities,
even If those customers may need more time
to board a vehicle.
than Uber was giving them, which was 2
minutes before the fee would be imposed.
So the United States sued Uber as
a private entity, primarily engaged
in the business of transporting people
under the ADA
for charging illegal fees,
for denying adequate boarding time,
which is something the ADA requires,
and for denying people
reasonable modifications
to the company’s wait time fee policy.
Uber did settle with the United States
and agreed to change its policy
to allow people with disabilities
and their frequent companion travelers
to opt in to a fee waiver program
so that they wouldn't be charged
for individuals
who don't opt in to that program
and are charged with time fees
because of disability,
Uber agrees to promptly refund them,
and it
agreed to advertise the program
to train its staff on the new policy.
It also agreed to provide payment
to over 65,000 individuals
who had been charged
wait time fees likely due to disability, over
$2 million to individuals
who had complained
to the United States or Uber,
and to pay the United States
a civil penalty under a two year
settlement agreement.
So again, those provisions
about requiring equitable fares,
about providing adequate boarding time
and requiring reasonable
modification to policies
all come from different provisions
of the ADA and from DOT's regulations
that the United States enforces.
Also, in the Uber case,
the attorney general was
did commence the action on a determination
that Uber had engaged in a pattern
or practice of discrimination
and that a group of persons
had been discriminated against.
And it rose to the level of raising
an issue of general public importance.
So we used that provision of the ADA
for our enforcement.
I was part of the litigation team
in that case,
and I'm happy with the results
and hope that many people are now
not being discriminated
against under that policy.
So I'm giving those three examples of DRS’s and DOJ’s enforcement in the area of
providers of
transportation services
like TNCs or taxi companies.
I did go over some of those regulatory provisions
relating to vehicle accessibility,
and we do have so much of our work
at the Disability Rights Section in that DOJ is complaint driven,
meaning we really do
rely on the public to send us
reports of discrimination.
And so what I'm doing right now is sharing in
the chat to the host and panel
It's the link
to our complaint reporting page.
So that any individual can file.
If you believe that you are aware
of a civil rights violation
under the federal law.
So thank you so much.
CM VOORDE: Thank you so much,
Matthew, for your for your time.
And again, your your update
and your willingness to join us today.
And we are just one minute away from
the time that we said that
we would pivot over to public comment.
I wanted to ask my fellow council members,
anybody has any burning
questions for our panelists,
Matt, Juliet and Kelly.
AC GORDON: Claudia,
I do have a comment.
Let's see, did I lose Kelly or is Kelly
still here?
I'll go ahead with my comment.
I know we're short on time.
First of all, thank you so much to
first of all, thank you so much
to all three of our presenters
and thank you for sharing
about the important and focused work
each of your agencies are doing.
And thank you for expanding
and covering so much ground
in the transportation space. It's
I guess I can only say
positive things and at the same time
something that I just wanted to flag,
just to put on your radar,
maybe we don't have time for further discussion
today when it does come to transportation.
Another accessibility challenge
that's involved is for the Deaf
and hard of hearing community.
So hopefully
that's something that you'll continue
to be mindful of
and add in to all of these
oppressive time
policies in regards
to physical accessibility issues,
in terms of wheelchairs
being lost and broken,
not being able to access the bathroom,
those are absolutely paramount.
But as a Deaf person myself,
I can't tell you how many times
after my transportation,
after my Uber or Lyft ride,
I get an email telling me
that I have a low rating from the driver
and I'm wondering what I did.
And it may be
that the driver was talking to me and felt
that I was rude or or unfriendly
and I have no idea what I did.
And I and also I get threatened
with a ban
from these transportation platforms.
So lack of training
is also
a barrier, just as you already know.
The same thing with airlines
not having captions for announcements
or flight delays or gate changes.
There's no captions
or visual notification.
So I just wanted to bring that.
But I am so encouraged by the work
each of you is doing in your agencies
and your ongoing work for all participants
today who are joining.
Please continue to make
your voices heard and find the time
to continue
to submit those comments and complaints
that are a result, a direct result.
These results are from your willingness
to raise your voice
and share your experiences of barriers.
So thank you.
CM VOORDE: Vice Chair Gordon.
Sascha, did I hear you come off mute
with a burning question?
CM BITTNER:  I wanted to ask about the ridesharing --
Annika?
(-interpreter: I'm sorry.)
(-interpreter: Give me one moment.)
(-interpreter: okay, go ahead.)
I wanted to ask about the ride sharing.
About the vehicles of the passengers.
With less than eight passengers.
My understanding
is you don't regulate those.
My question is what would be done
in order to regulate those.
What would need to be done.
If we don't answer it now.
Maybe can talk to you offline.
CM VOORDE: We do have a moment,
if you want to take a chance to respond or if you
if you'd like to connect with Sascha offline.
BUCKLAND: I actually can respond quickly.
And then I will be happy to talk offline too.
But the thing that I sent to Ana to send around
on taxi cabs was done in the 90s,
right?
The early nineties, right after the ADA.
It's old, I mean the world is completely different place than it was
and Matthew, I think, could chime in on this too.
The whole thing
about when viewed in its entirety,
do they provide equivalent service?
I think the answer to that today is no,
they do not provide
an equivalent service,
so I think they should be required to. So
I don't know what the mechanism is to trigger it.
Maybe Matthew could address that better.
But I think the whole
determination that
they didn't have to do
make anything
other than automobile accessible
or they needed to make everything
other than an automobile accessible,
I think needs to be revisited because
Lyft and Uber didn't exist.
None of that stuff existed.
So I think that access
was completely different back then.
So even accessible cabs,
I don't think they could even envision
what's out there today.
So I just think the whole thing
sort of probably needs to be revisited
and a new determination made.
But that's my take.
I’ll let Matthew chime in if he’d like.
FAIELLA: Hi, thank you, Kelly, and thank you Sascha for the question.
And yeah,
I think the regulatory requirements
for accessible vehicles is fairly narrow.
As it’s written.
And as Kelly mentioned, doesn't apply to such a broad
range, different kinds of vehicles
that exist now.
So certainly a change in the regulations
could help to fix that.
I will point out that
in addition to the
specific requirements
about accessible vehicles,
we do have broader
nondiscrimination requirements
for private entities
that provide transportation services.
So even if we may not be able to require
that they have an accessible vehicle
if they don't lease or purchase a new non
automobile that has a capacity of
more eight
even if we can't get
to the accessibility of the vehicle,
given the examples about Lyft and Uber
just to try to demonstrate that
unfortunately there are many other
kinds of discrimination
that people with disabilities may face,
and we do stand ready to continue
to enforce the law in those situations.
And again,
folks can file complaints with us.
We definitely want to know about
what is happening
as the transportation involves.
And as Kelly mentioned,
we encounter types of transportation
that probably weren't
even thought about back in the 90s.
So please do continue to let us know.
BUCKLAND: Emily,
If I could just real quickly,
I'd like to respond to Claudia, but.
Well, first of all. Hi, Claudia.
Secondly, though.
AC GORDON: Hi Kelly.
BUCKLAND: I think
there's a lot of things the department
has actually done to increase
accessibility for people who are Deaf.
One of the things I forgot to mention
was that we have
released at least $1 billion
for airport terminal improvements
and 75 of those 80
grants were actually disability related.
And a number of those added in visual signs
for gate changes, that kind of stuff,
audio loops in the airports,
audio loops are going to be
on all of the new Amtrak cars,
and there's going to be also captioned and
visible signs in the train cars
that they're building as well.
And so
there
is a number
of things that we have done around
people with deafness
or hearing impairments as well.
And the department
and the last thing I'll say is that
when it comes to air travel,
I mentioned what the United Agreement was
that they've started,
including captioning on both
in-flight communications
and even entertainment.
But the other thing I didn’t mention is the next
you'll remember what we had a regulation
negotiation in 2016
and communication in-flight
communications
was the one thing that everybody agreed on
and so that we only took up the wheelchair stuff first
because people are getting informed
that to a greater degree.
So one of the next NPRMs
you'll come out probably like 2025,
will be on in-flight communications and
we'll a rule
required that in airplanes at that point.
AC GORDON: And thank you, Kelly.
And just wanted to say thank you for following up
and it absolutely makes sense
to prioritize things in that way.
So thank you. Emily?
CM VOORDE: No, thank you very much.
And thank you once again to Matt, Kelly, Juliet,
for your time and your candor
in your ongoing work on these issues.
My colleagues and I will be in touch
with follow up questions.
I acknowledge that our time together
was shorter today than had been planned,
and I once again
want to offer my sincere apologies for
some of the delays
that that have pushed us up schedule
and that have led
to technical difficulties.
So thank you very much.
You're welcome to stay.
We're going to transition
now to our public comment period.
AC GORDON: And Emily.
I also wanted to add
I and and I want to emphasize,
I know that there were there was important
information contained in your slides
and our Council staff
will ensure that everyone who came
who came to today's meeting
will receive a copy of those slides.
Thank you,
Emily.
I'll continue to see the floor to you
to facilitate the public comment period.
CM VOORDE: Fantastic.
Thank you.
Acting Chair Gordon.
So pivoting to our public comment period,
Once again, apologies
that we are running a bit behind, but
want to be sure to prioritize
this and are eager.
We are eager to hear from those of you
who are joining us today.
We're currently working, myself
included, on a policy project
regarding the experiences of people
with disabilities in this country.
And for the next 30 or so minutes, we have
five prompts on ground transportation
that we're hoping to hear from the public
on those five prompts are as follows
Please share your experiences in obtaining
wheelchair
accessible taxis or ride share, i.e.
Uber or Lyft.
Two, if you requested a wheelchair
accessible van
or WAV through a taxi company.
Did the company have a WAV?
If the company did not have enough
WAVs in its fleet,
Did the taxi service offer to provide
you a WAV through a different company?
Was the price comparable
to a non accessible taxi?
Three.
If you requested a WAV from a rideshare company, did the company have a WAV?
And if not, were you referred to a service that did?
Was the price comparable
to a non accessible ride share
or have you filed a complaint
with the US Department of Justice
or the US Department of Transportation
about discrimination by a taxi company
or ride share regarding lack of WAVs?
And if so, what was the result?
And finally, is paratransit
available your community?
What are the pros
and cons of using this service
and what should be changed?
During this public comment period,
as is always the case,
we are going to need to adhere to a strict
three minute limit for any comments
received.
I will prompt you when you have 30 seconds left in your 3 minute comment period.
Once called please state
your name, any organization affiliation
and then proceed to provide your comment.
We'll
try hear from as many of you as possible.
We're going to begin with those
who registered for public comment before
turning to anybody.
I'm sorry.
We're going to begin with those
who registered for public comment
before turning to anyone else on the line
with indicated
that they wish to give comment.
You may do so by using the raised hand
function in the Zoom program.
If we run out of time today,
we strongly encourage anyone who did
not give comment today with experiences
they'd like to share to
please email their comments to the Council
at publiccomment@ncd.gov
so that we can incorporate your feedback,
your stories into our Mobility Disability
project.
Okay, So thank you so much.
With that housekeeping,
we are going to turn to our official
public comment period
in starting up with Danica Gonsalves
from Paralyzed Veterans of America.
Danica, you should be able to unmute and
you have the floor.
Hi, I'm Danica Gonzalves
an advocacy attorney
at Paralyzed Veterans of America.
And I'll be speaking on behalf of the PBA
members.
PBA is a congressionally chartered
Veterans Service organization
with nearly 16,000
honorably discharged veterans
who have incurred a spinal cord injury
or disease.
Virtually all members
use mobility assistive devices,
including wheelchairs, power and scooters.
PBA members repeatedly experience
a lack of wheelchair
accessible vehicles or WAVs.
Taxi or rideshare companies may have none.
Or there are so few
they are not available when needed.
This is even more prevalent
in rural areas.
Furthermore, despite ADA requirements,
emerging modes of transportation
like autonomous
vehicles are not accessible.
The lack of WAVs is highlighted
for transportation to and from airports.
PVA members fly for hours,
then wait hours for a WAV.
Sometimes it never arrives.
Travelers may be stranded
or forced to choose destinations
with other accessible transportation
options. Beyond taxis and rideshares.
PVA members also face barriers
with hotels and car rental company
shuttles, which are frequently inaccessible
even when accessible ramps
may be inoperable.
These shuttles are free,
but customers are told they must find
and pay for their own transportation.
And furthermore, some members use vehicles
with hand controls
when they attempt to reserve
a rental vehicle with hand controls,
they may be required to call the company
instead of booking online,
the company may not offer
the accommodation.
They are told hand
controls can only be installed in specific
types of vehicles or are required
to make this request days in advance.
Customers without disabilities can reserve
a vehicle online, onsite
and have access to a variety vehicles.
In addition, renting a wheelchair accessible van
is significantly more expensive.
Mobility device users are excluded
from services, pay
surcharges or face higher burdens
than those without disabilities.
Paratransit service
raise additional transportation
burdens, services may be limited
in geographic areas and hours.
Often,
a rider must book a ride days in advance
without the option
for real time, reservations or changes,
or they are given a large pickup window,
sometimes hours, and forced to book rides
hours before needed hope
and wait to see if there are unexpected
cancellations or no shows overtaking.
Danica, I apologize.
Not a problem. Thank you.
When member
a one member waited for hours in the dark
waiting for paratransit without knowing
if it would actually arrive.
Overall,
even when paratransit is available,
they failed to meet
the needs of passengers
and do not provide equal transportation
services,
PVA thanks NCD for the opportunity
to comment on these critical issues
and would love to be part
of the policy papers that are issued.
Thank you.
CM VOORDE: Thank you very much
Danica, I appreciate your comment greatly.
I want to pivot to Alex Elegudin from Wheeling Forward.
Alex, you have the floor.
PUBLIC COMMENT: Thank you so much.
Can you guys hear me okay?
CM VOORDE: We can, yes.
PUBLIC COMMENT: I am super excited to be here and give comment on this.
I'm going to be speaking a little fast
given our time.
I hope no one's offended.
I'm going to talk about
both the rideshare and paratransit
topic, starting with the rideshare.
I just want to introduce my experience
a little bit.
I'm not former accessibility
chief of MTA, New York City Transit.
I'm also the former accessibility manager
at the New York City Taxi Limousine
Commission and serve as the accessibility director of Columbia University campus.
So just want to I appreciate the comments
given by both Kelly and Matthew.
On the rideshare issue,
I think there is a glaring hole in it
which becomes clear
is that there's not enough regulations.
The regulations don't address this.
And I want to clarify some of the facts
specifically as it relates to wheelchair
accessible taxis.
Uber Lyft only provide wheelchair
accessible service in nine
cities New York City,
Chicago, Philadelphia, some others.
That means 96% of the country
wheelchair accessible vehicles
is not available in their platform.
So whether you file a DOJ complaint
in Oklahoma or somewhere else,
you will not get service.
And there's nothing
they can do about the complaint.
And the issue is actually, in my opinion,
not a matter of WAV availability.
It's a matter of unwillingness
on behalf of the companies--
there are WAVs all over country.
My estimation as an expert on
this is about 150,000 WAVs
that are roaming around this country
at any given time.
Wheelchair accessible vehicle,
even if a wheelchair accessible vehicle is roaming
the streets of Oklahoma
and wants to provide service to a customer,
Uber Lyft do not allow them
to be identified on their apps.
Uber, Lyft have fought numerous lawsuits
and won using their legal power,
and these are all the reasons
why they make
not providing WAV service
the cost of doing business.
Which is the reason why
what I'm saying and everyone here
I think would agree the federal government
just needs to mandate
that they have to do it.
It's an unwillingness issue
and they've been skirting these rules
for more than a decade.
On the topic of paratransit,
I want to talk about something
a very policy consideration
that I've been talking a lot
with the NCD and others about,
is there's major capacity constraints
and this relates to Uber and Lyft
providing service with regard
to random drug and alcohol testing.
The USDOT and FTA require random
drug and alcohol testing,
which is the same standard that exists
for train engineer driving an Amtrak.
A bus driver driving a bus
it’s the same standard that they hold for
for an Uber
Lyft or taxi driver providing paratransit service.
To give you
New York as an example,
There's 120 thousand taxis,
rideshares in New York City.
But 5,000 participate
in the paratransit programs,
which limits the capacity of the program
because random drug and alcohol testing
is such a high standard, Uber
and is a question of equity, not safety.
If I am an able bodied passenger
ordering a Lyft
or an Uber in New York City,
I can get the vehicle
CM VOORDE: 30 Seconds remaining Alex, 30 seconds.
PUBLIC COMMENT: No problem. Thank you Emily.
This is a question of equity.
If if a non wheelchair using customer or,
non paratransit using customer requested
Uber or Lyft, they can get picked up
because the regulations don't
match those same drivers
in Uber and Lyft or often
part time drivers cannot participate
paratransit service.
So you're by having these rules
that are somewhat artificial, in
my opinion, in place.
You're limiting the capacity
of hundreds of thousands of taxis to
participate in paratransit service.
And if you think about it, my closing
comment is Uber, Lyft, billions of trips
a year without requiring random drug
and alcohol testing
for the non-disabled
non paratransit population base.
But they do that because of the extreme
regulation standard
that is applied to paratransit customers.
And on that, I yield my time.
CM VOORDE: Thank you, Alex. Appreciate it.
Next, I'd like to turn to John Morris
from wheelchair travel dot org.
John, you should be able to unmute.
PUBLIC COMMENT: Thank you and good afternoon.
My name is John Morris,
founder of Wheelchair Travel dot org,
an accessible travel website that is read
by wheelchair users and disabled people
from across the United States
and around the world.
I am a triple amputee and power
wheelchair user.
I travel frequently, taking
well over 100 flights per year
and have done so since my first trip
as a wheelchair user ten years ago.
I encountered many barriers while
traveling throughout the United States.
None more frustrating than the lack
of accessible ground transportation.
The lack of wheelchair taxis has left me
stranded for long periods of time,
in some cases overnight
in a list of cities that includes.
But not limited to Cleveland. Dallas.
Los Angeles.
Orlando. Miami.
Nashville. Tampa.
San Diego and Saint Louis.
I was once forced to sleep overnight
in a gas station parking lot
over my ten years of disabled travel.
Rideshare services
have expanded across the country in cities
both large and small,
taking significant market share
and leaving traditional taxi companies
at a disadvantage.
While ADA compliance
among cab companies was poor
ten years ago,
it is significantly worse now.
Wheelchair taxis
that previously existed no longer
do when calling for a wheelchair taxi
in many cities.
Customers being told
the van is out for repairs.
Where adapted taxis do exist.
Most operators
require reservations of 24 hours
or more in advance and only operate
during normal business hours from 9 a.m.
to 5 p.m..
Policies which restrict
the freedom of disabled people.
Why is this?
It's because ADA
taxis are not kept in continuous service
but instead spend the night
at the homes of their daytime drivers.
A small number of U.S.
cities, fewer
than ten have gained concessions
from rideshare operators
to provide accessible services.
However, those services
rarely operate around the clock.
With few exceptions,
the availability of wheelchair taxis
has decreased significantly,
particularly following the pandemic.
Pricing discrimination
also serves as a barrier to taxi
transport.
CM VOORDE: 30 seconds John.
PUBLIC COMMENT: Wheelchair users desperate for a pickup
may be forced
to pay above metered rates
to guarantee a ride.
Even in large cities like L.A.,
where I observed this last year
and in Nashville, where a taxi driver
attempted to extort me,
we need to update ADA
regulations to account
for the changing transportation economy,
and I look forward to submitting more detailed
recommendations in written form.
Thank you.
CM VOORDE: Many thanks, John.
I'd like to now pivot to John Sage,
who is with Sage Inclusion.
John, you should be able to unmute.
PUBLIC COMMENT: Great. Can you hear me?
CM VOORDE: Sure can.
PUBLIC COMMENT: Wonderful, wonderful and
honored that I get to follow my friend
John Morris.
I'm John Sage. I'm
a manual wheelchair user.
I'm CEO of three accessible travel companies
and I'm on the U.S.
Travel and Tourism Advisory Board
advising the U.S.
Secretary of Commerce
on accessibility issues.
I'm the chairman that committee.
And I know that the supply
and the need for this has has been
discussed a good bit.
So I want to add a little bit
different context to it.
And it's really my experience
in the travel industry
as to how accessibility changes get made.
And so what my experience has been
is that if disabled people
advocating for accessibility,
there's only so much that can happen.
What really has to happen and is more
effective is if you can get able bodied money
dependent, you know,
it becomes
dependent on things being accessible.
So I'll give you a few examples.
So one of the things that we put
in our recommendations to the U.S.
Secretary of Commerce
was to use the purchasing power
of the federal government
to ensure accessibility.
So President Biden, one of his first
executive orders, talked about the workforce being
accessible and equitable
and right now, the federal government
employees have to do a lot of work
on their own to plan their own trips.
And so it's not equitable.
And so that's something that
that can happen, is use the purchasing of the federal government.
I'll also say that events, meetings
and events,
if we can get accessibility into RFP
process, the request for proposal process,
where accessibility is
one of the factors in determining
where an event
or a conference sporting event or some big
a big expensive occurrences is occurring
that will get accessibility on the radar.
And the last thing really is just
to to ensure, you know, the Department
of Transportation ensure alignment
with the Department of Commerce.
I think this is something
that can be tackled on
multiple fronts and would really make some
some progress here.
So I really want to thank the Council
and everybody involved for this.
This is certainly a needed area
and I appreciate all this effort.
CM VOORDE: Thank you very much, John.
I'd like to pivot now. Carol Tyson.
Carol is joining us from DREDF--the
Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund,
PUBLIC COMMENT: Good afternoon.
I'll be sharing anecdotes
gathered from DREDF friends and colleagues,
as well as concerning trends,
regarding experiences with paratransit.
Paratransit remains a critical option
for people with disabilities.
Unfortunately, long and often
unpredictable wait times for pick up
remain an issue.
In addition, we have heard that adequate
time is not being given
for passengers to get to the vehicle
that is picking them up.
And when a paratransit trip
is a shared trip, it can be a 20 minute
trip easily turns into a three hour
or even longer trip.
These long and unpredictable wait times
combined with shared rides can lead to
riders being late for or losing their jobs
or canceled medical appointments.
We have heard
instances of drivers taking actions
that lead to an unsafe atmosphere.
Recently, a paratransit
threatened to call the police when a rider
had difficulty leaving the vehicle.
The transit agency
sent a warning to the rider rather
than taking steps to ensure their safety
and well-being, that if it's concerned
with any transit policy
which leads to unnecessary interactions
between police and disabled passengers,
especially disabled black and brown
passengers are disproportionately harmed
in these interactions.
We have also heard on the flip side
that the social interaction
between the driver and passenger
can provide an important social
connection for riders
who might otherwise be isolated.
Regarding use of wheelchair accessible
taxis and transportation
network companies or TNCs.
As I just noted,
Uber and Lyft only provide wheelchair
accessible vehicles or WAV service in select markets.
In cities where WAV
service is not offered.
Lyft provides a link on their website
to paratransit options in those markets.
However, the link is broken and takes
user to a page that is no longer active.
Many transit agencies partner witnesses,
taxi companies to provide alternatives to paratransit.
Unfortunately, we hear that
there are not enough WAV vehicles
to meet demand. In Washington DC,
where WMATA partners with TNCs and taxis
to provide a free on demand alternative
that is not a shared ride.
We have heard that the service
does not provide Uber WAV vehicles
because the staff would rather leave
the limited WAV vehicles on the streets
for wheelchair users
who want to hail a ride in real time.
In many areas
where TNCs operate, transit
ridership has decreased
and the numbers of taxis and wheelchair
accessible taxis has decreased as well.
There are many studies
that show this that decreases in transit.
Ridership can lead to cuts in transit
hours
and routes can also lead
to cuts in paratransit service areas.
In addition, New York City
recently implemented policies
pushing to make taxi and TNC fleets
all electric.
The current requirement
allows for gas vehicles
to still be operated
if they are wheelchair accessible.
DREDF is advocating for any alternative
fuel or cleaner transportation mode
to also be fully accessible,
including to wheelchair users.
Finally, Waymo is currently providing
autonomous on demand
commercial service,
similar to Uber and Lyft.
They claim their AVs are safer.
Waymo does not offer an autonomous
wheelchair accessible vehicle option,
nor have they shared plans to do so
in the future.
Thank you again for the opportunity
to share and for all you do at NCD.
DREDF looks forward
to supporting your efforts in these areas,
and I'll submit my comments
in writing as well. Thank you.
CM VOORDE: Thank you much, Carol.
I want to turn to our final
two pre-registered commenters.
Thank you for your patience.
Kent Keyser I invite you to unmute
and begin comment.
PUBLIC COMMENT: Thank you.
I'm Kent Keyser
with United Spinal Association.
We thank the Council for all your work.
Especially for those who like me,
must use a wheelchair to be mobile.
My wheelchair travel
that I will share with you today
is experienced daily around the country
of my fellow wheelchair users.
I ask you to consider the barriers to ground transportation that
people living in rural America confront.
The Council's vision statement.
very, very optimistically imagines
affordable and reliable transportation.
for me. On behalf of America's
5.5 million wheelchair users
that United Spinal represents,
we hope
that you will also add safe, accessible
and
on-demand transportation to your vision.
I live in Northern Virginia, across the
Potomac River from our nation's capital.
Even here, I don't have fully accessible
transportation.
So let me answer your great questions
to prove that point.
In the past, I’ve requested
a wheelchair accessible van--
WAV-- through my county.
Arlington County’s taxi company.
They have some WAVs,
but because they don't have enough WAVs,
over the past 17 years,
I've been stranded for hour or more
at times waiting to be picked up.
Also, you must make a reservation
with them 2 hours early.
This company is.
Also one of Arlington's paratransit
providers.
For whatever reason, a paratransit call
takes precedence over a regular call.
So now I use paratransit exclusively.
The bus system is great
if they stop where you want to go.
The same for the Subway, except it
usually takes four good hearted strangers.
To lift my wheelchair on board.
one of the cars.
The price on the taxi meter
may be the same price as non WAV taxis,
but the cost.
Of my loss of valuable
as a human being waiting on
rides is a tremendous difference
to someone not requiring a WAV taxi.
When Uber announced it was
providing Uber WAV in Washington, D.C. and
in suburbs like Arlington, I tried.
But my wheelchair didn't
fit in the vehicle. Routinely,
over the years, when paratransit fails me
I've checked Uber WAV,
but none had been available at that time.
I have not filed a federal complaint yet,
but the clock is definitely ticking
because my paratransit service
may be getting an overhaul
with a new provider contract.
CM VOORDE: 30 seconds Kent, 30 seconds.
PUBLIC COMMENT: Talk about the pros and cons and how it should be changed.
The 33 years
since ADA became law have been
extraordinarily, technological advancements.
Unfortunately, most paratransit services
have not adopted these useful tools.
Most notably providing on demand.
service for most people in real time
vehicle location.
So we don't waste time
waiting on our rides.
Importantly, more efficient
scheduling reduces shared rides
with nonsensical crazy distances
that wastes everybody's
time, including the driver.
And speaking of drivers.
CM VOORDE: That’s time, Kent.
I want to thank all of our
those who have commented today.
I invite our commenters
and those who had wished to comment
to please send along any comments
and notes by email to publiccomment@ncd.gov
that’s publiccomment
--one word-- @ncd.gov.
That concludes the time that we have
allotted, unfortunately, for public comment.
So I'm going to turn our floor back
over to our Madam Acting Vice Chair
Gordon.
AC GORDON: Thank you, Emily.
Thank you for running
that important part of today's agenda.
We had some wonderful speakers
and I also wanted to thank
all of the individuals
who were involved with public comment.
This is really the heart of NCD--
listening to our community.
Listening to your counsel on our policy
and our programs and being able to pass
that along to the federal government
and various agencies.
So thank you
to all the public commenters from today.
I will now turn it to our general counsel,
Joan.
JOAN DUROCHER: Thank you, Madam Chair.
AC GORDON: Yes, I know time is a little brief, Joan,
so I will just send it right over to you.
DUROCHER: Wonderful. Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
I appreciate that.
I'm Joan Durocher, NCD's
general counsel and director of policy.
And for the first part of this
policy report,
I'll be asking the Council member leads
to give a very brief update
on some of policy work underway.
I'm going to start with our clinical
trials report, which is nearly complete,
but Emily will be giving the update
on that one.
Emily
CM VOORDE: Yes, apologies.
Just give me one second
to pull up my notes here.
Okay.
Fantastic.
So the final draft of the clinical trials
report is under review
and will be shortly ready
for a Council vote within the next weeks.
The report addresses the implicit
and explicit exclusions of people
with disabilities in clinical trials and
provides recommendations on how to improve
acceptance and participation
of people
with disabilities in the clinical trials.
If you have any questions,
please reach out to myself
or Amy Nicholas on NCD’s
staff on the project.
Thank you so much.
DUROCHER: Thank you, Emily.
Next, our 2024 Progress Report is underway right now.
Neil Romano is going
to be giving that update.
CM ROMANO: Thank you, Joan.
NCD will be drafting the 2024
Progress Report in-house.
Through this more cost saving approach
NCD will be able to draft an easy
to digest
update to the President and Congress
on matters of disability policy and law.
The report will provide an update
on progress made in the space of disability
policy, while also making related policy
recommendations
that remain necessary for NCDs
Statutory requirement.
The report will include recommendations
on multiple subject
areas as determined appropriate by NCD.
NCD has begun initial chapter drafts,
and is planning to have a full report
draft
ready for the Council vote this summer.
Thank You Joan.
DUROCHER: Thank you Neil.
for the Health Disparities report,
Theo Braddy is going to give that one.
CM BRADDY: Thank you, Joan.
I try to get through this pretty quickly.
Since our last Council meeting
NCD has continued
to correspond  with the administration and Congress concerning its
recommended  Framework to End Health Disparities for People with Disabilities.
More specifically, since the policy
successes of the National Institute
of Health
designating people with disabilities
as a health disparities population
for purposes of improved research
and data,
the Department of Justice issued
a proposed rule on Title II of the ADA
that aims to improve access
to medical diagnostic equipment
for people with disabilities,
NCD has been particularly focused on a recommendation
that disability, clinical care
and competency training be widely included
in medical training and that people
with disabilities be identified nationally
as a medically underserved
population under law
NCD continues to brainstorm and collaborate
with non-governmental organizations
that are positioned to have an impact
on the issue of disability,
clinical care and competency training.
Councilwoman Voorde will discuss the need
for such training
in a conference in March
sponsored by the Accreditation Council
of Graduate Medical Education,
which will be attended
by heads of residency program
from across the U.S..
NCIL also continued a discussion
with the Association of Medical Colleges
about potential efforts and NCD
continues to meet with representatives of the U.S.
Government Accountability Office
to provide policy advice with respect
to disability clinical care and competency training
of medical profession
and other health disparity
policy matters
as the GAO like NCD
will now be working to effect change
in these vital matters. Simultaneously,
NCD has been meeting
with Congressional representatives,
non-governmental organizations
and health resources
and Service Administration
at Health and Human Services
to determine
how best to deliver better health services
to people with disabilities,
as would be done if people with disability
were to be designated
nationally as a medical, underserved
population under the law. NCD continues to weigh policy options
and collaborate with the entities to determine best approaches.
Thank you, Joan.
DUROCHER: Thank you.
Theo Next is Hoskie on the line?
I think he is. Hoskie
Benally is going to give an update
on the tribal lands work.
CM BENALLY: Okay.
Can you hear me?
Right.
Okay. Thank you.
Yeah.
This year NCD
one of the biggest policy
projects is to develop a report
regarding barriers
being faced by these Americans
with disabilities.
And there's a group called
the Intertribal Disability Advocacy Group,
which is comprised of several tribes
across Indian country who were engaged
in listening sessions
with Native Americans with disabilities
to determine what the barriers are
in the areas of education,
medical services, voter rights,
a number of other areas.
And so NCD is going to be working
with this Intertribal group
and the intertribal group has finished their listening sessions
and are in the process of writing a report
that will be shared and
reviewed with NCD, and then NCD will.
work off of that report to come up with their own report.
So that's what we have with tribal coordination.
DUROCHER: Thank you, Hoskie.
All the work.
I want to make sure to highlight is
we recently submitted comments via
the interagency review process
to the Department of Justice
on the Web accessibility final rule.
And next week will be submitting comments
on DOJ’saccessible medical equipment
NPRM and Ana has been the lead
on both of those.
So a big thank you to Ana.
FEMA issued an interim
final ruling that will take effect
at the end of March.
It will streamline
the intake process for disaster
survivors and many of the new regulations
benefit people with disabilities.
So that's some good news.
NCD has been making those recommendations
for many years.
So a big thank you to Amy,
who has been a lead on our FEMA work.
From our panels today,
you learned more
about our underway work on NCD’s mobility
projects and our input into the Census questions.
So the policy team has been rocketing
along on any number of fronts.
And finally, we are in the process
of setting up a new subcommittee list
for Council members.
So please
let me know if you have any interest
in any particular projects or topic areas
and we can do some juggling
if needed as we go forward.
So those the latest highlights.
And now I want to give a very brief
overview of the report included
in your notebook materials that I'm hoping
you all had a chance to read.
The title of our latest report
is From Fetal Surgery
to Gene Editing: The Current and Potential Impact
of Prenatal Interventions on
People with Disabilities.
As Madam Chair mentioned,
this report is the next report
in NCD’s bioethics series, which
the Policy Team started in 2019.
We started the series because despite
the growing understanding that disability
is a normal part of the human experience,
the lives of people
with disabilities continue to be devalued
in medical decision making.
In this series,
we've taken on several different topics,
including organ transplantation.
physician-assisted suicide, quality-adjusted life years,
medical futility issues, and started
looking at genetic testing
primarily through an employment
discrimination lens.
This next report that you're voting on
today also looks at genetic testing.
But here we've looked
at prenatal interventions
that can include a host of technologies,
and applications, ranging
from fetal surgery to repair of lesion
in utero or a baby with spinal bifida
to pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis, screening out embryos.
with certain conditions,
to human heritable genome
editing to alter the DNA of an embryo,
to modify a genetic trait.
All prenatal interventions
ranging from fetal surgery to prenatal
genetic screening, to heritable genome
editing, hearing unique practical, ethical
and disability rights implications.
These technologies
required guidance from policy experts,
scientists, medical providers,
disability and social justice advocates,
researchers, bioethicists
and other experts.
The report that we are issuing
now identifies
the possible impact of these technologies
on the disability community
gathers input about recommended
policies and practices
so that any prenatal technology
developed and utilized
are determined by including people
with disabilities as decision makers
who have experience living with various
prenatally diagnosed conditions
and aims to provide recommendations
to answer any prenatal intervention
do not disproportionately harm people
with disabilities.
As a historically marginalized population.
Each report in the series,
including this one, examines how
these areas are developing as a result
of technological and scientific advances,
as well as changes
to the law and health care delivery.
A combination of original research,
stakeholder and scholar interviews,
literature reviews,
reviews
and media reports and legal analysis
where appropriate, is used to examine
each topic.
As always, each report includes findings
based on these thorough examinations
and makes recommendations
to lawmakers, policymakers
that we hope will ensure the lives of people
with disabilities
are valued on an equal basis with others
and will allow for people
with disabilities to make health care
decisions in a non-coercive environment
that respects dignity, privacy
and autonomy.
I would be remiss if I did not thank Stephanie Meredith
who did her doctoral practicum with NCD
by researching and writing this report.
She did an extraordinary job on this.
I hope you all had an opportunity
to read it, the fabulous report.
And with that,
I turn it back over to Madam Chair
to call for a vote.
AC GORDON: Thank you very much, Joan.
And thank you to everyone
for your report outs.
This incredible work is happening
in all these different areas.
Thank you
from a very small team. So kudos.
We will
move forward with calling for a vote
on From Fetal Surgery
to Gene Editing: The Current and Potential
Impact of Prenatal Interventions
on People with Disabilities.
CM BITTNER:  I move that we accept the report.
AC GORDON: Thank you.
Sascha.
Do I have a second?
CM ROMANO: Second.
AC GORDON: Thank you, Neil.
Now that we have our motion
and our second,
I will call Miss Lewis
to take a roll call vote.
LEWIS: Thank you.
Calling Vice Chair.
Acting Chair.
Madam Claudia Gordon
AC GORDON: Aye.
LEWIS: Hoskie Benally?
CM BENALLY: Aye.
LEWIS: Sascha Bittner
CM BITTNER: Aye.
LEWIS: Theo Braddy?
CM BRADDY: Yes.
LEWIS: Shawn Kennemer?
Shawn Kennemer proxy?
Risa Rifkind?
CM RIFKIND: Aye.
LEWIS: Neil Romano?
CM ROMANO: Aye.
LEWIS: Emily Voorde?
CM VOORDE: Yes.
LEWIS: I yield the floor back to you Vice Chair,
Acting Chair, Madam Claudia Gordon
AC GORDON: Okay, thank you.
And one quick and final topic.
I wanted to suggest
we will go right over to Anne in a moment,
but this topic is related to
the Council members and our timekeeping.
As you
know, we need to document
and report our time for compensation.
And I know it's been a challenge
in some areas in regards to the process,
the paperwork platform issues,
and I have specifically asked
Anne on how we can iron out this process
for our Council members to ensure
we are compliant with the regulations
as well as
keeping us accountable
since many of us have full time jobs
in addition to our role here.
So the question was looking also at how
we can get more support from staff at NCD.
And I wanted to thank Anne for her time
and attention and investment in trying
to solve this pain point in order
to increase the efficiency of our work.
So I will turn it over
to Anne to give a brief update on what
the future of timekeeping will look like.
EXEC DIR SOMMERS MCINTOSH: Thank you, Madam Chair.
Just so a quick one.
We talked internally about this,
as Claudia mentioned,
and what we want to do
is ease the pain and ease the burden.
So you were told
in your orientation process
that all members every two weeks
needed to turn in two things.
They needed to record their time
in HR Links
and we've been doing trainings to that
to effectuate that
with Netterie playing a leadership
role on that front
and that you also needed to turn in an
SGE Excel sheet,
noting the days that you worked
SGE standing for special government
employee.
And you may remember you may not,
that during orientation
you received a memo in your materials
regarding what
special government employees timekeeping
why we need to kind of
keep a count of days so you don't work
past the 130 day limit
that you have in a year.
And so if you need any more information
on day counting, we can get with you
offline, Joan can go over any questions
you have about that particular memo
or that particular process.
But what we wanted to come back to you
with as a solution that we hope
will at least begin to ease
the burden is going forward
for any members who are not billing.
And some some members choose not to.
For any members who are not billing,
they can simply email once a pay period.
When Stacey sends his reminder out
and tell Stacey the days they worked.
So they just all they need to do is hit reply to Stacey's email
and report the days that they worked.
From there,
the AFO team will take the information
and populate the SGE report for the
individual member so you no longer need,
if you're not billing,
you no longer need to enter
any information in the SGE report
and you don't need to enter your time
in HR Links
since you're not billing. For members
who are billing their time,
whether through HR Links or in some cases
because of accessibility or security reasons,
there are a few of you
who are doing it through paper form.
For those
of you who are billing your hours,
all you need to do is bill your hours.
So every two weeks enter your time
whichever way you're doing it currently,
if you're doing it through HR Links,
continue doing it through HR Links.
If you're doing it through paper form
with the AFO team
because of security or accommodations
reasons, continue doing that.
Staff are going to take the next step
and translate the information
from your timesheet into the report.
So the big ticket takeaway from
this update is no more SGE reports.
If you're giving us your time,
we will populate the SGE information for you.
You no longer have to do that yourselves.
And if and then we just also
wanted to emphasize if members
are having access issues with HR
Links and you need staff to enter
the time for you.
Like if you if you have been
having accommodations issues
or if you've never taken the plunge
to experience the joys of HR Links,
most of you will know.
thank you Theo--
HR Links is a painful, torturous,
horrible time keeping system,
but unfortunately, we are constrained
to use it because of our HR
Vendor and so we don't have a say so
in changing the software, unfortunately.
So for those of you
who continue to struggle with it
or sometimes even the staff have issues,
you know, we don't expect to,
but we log in and we can get through.
We're getting a spinning wheel
or we're getting error issues.
If that's the case,
just reach out to the staff
and we'll do our best to assist you.
You know, we'll do a flyover.
We'll give you air support.
So we want to just re communicate to you.
It would be extremely helpful
to us to get real time timekeeping,
because then we're not dealing
with surprises,
especially in C.R. periods of time
where we have such a small budget
that we're working with.
And it helps us to kind of keep
a real time accounting of the hours
and also identify problems
as they're coming up as close to real time
as possible because we have had issues
with that as well.
And so again, a big message
is no more SGE reports,
as long as you're providing
those real time, time keeping,
we will take care of the rest.
If you're not doing billing,
you have nothing to do
except tell the staff
what days you worked.
That's a
and we'll take it from there
and then just again,
if you have any additional
links, training needs, troubleshooting
needs reach out to Netterie,
she's very happy to help
and going forward--Shawn couldn't be at this meeting unexpectedly
but he has decided to take it upon himself
to do some individual outreach
to members to find out what is
and isn't working with them, and also
try to bridge the gap
to the extent that we have more work to do
on addressing any policies or procedures
to make it even less painful.
But we're hoping that this interim step
will at least get us moving in the right
direction.
Happy to fill any questions?
CM BRADDY: No, this is very helpful.
Thank you very much.
SOMMERS MCINTOSH: And I yield things back to you.
Madam Chairwoman.
AC GORDON: Thank you, thank you Anne for providing
that clarification for everyone.
We greatly appreciate your assistance.
Okay.
LEWIS: Madam Chair, this is Netterie.
I just have one comment to make
because I know there has been issues
with Council members
who said they submitted their time in HR
Links but they weren’t paid.
So if i can just reiterate for those
that are submitting their time in HR Links,
if you can just ensure
that someone from the AFO Team, either myself or
Mr. Brown is aware so it could be approved.
So the only reason ,
and I know Emily,
this happened to you, the only reason
you did not receive payment
because your time was not approved.
So after I approved it and then notified
GSA you were paid.
So if anyone submitted their time in
HR Links, if you didn't receive confirmation
that your time has been approved,
please notify either myself or Stacey Brown,
so we can look into HR Links to ensure
your time has been approved for payment.
SOMMERS MCINTOSH: So everybody.
And I'll just add one more thing.
I'm sorry, Claudia
HR Links is great sending auto emails too.
So if you have, i think
as a translation on the practical side,
HR Links will send you a donotreply@hrlinks.com
or something like that email
as soon as they record your time.
And so as soon as enter it
you should be getting one of those
do not reply emails
and you should also be getting one
when your time has been approved.
We will do on our end a sweep because it's
it would be great if you did send an email
if you don't get an approval email.
But we also on the staff side will begin
checking proactively your behalf
to make sure that if anything is entered,
that it is approved timely.
So we'll circle back
with some more details in the email form.
Just to kind of reiterate
what was said here.
But again, hopefully we'll start
experiencing less pain going forward.
So thank you, everybody.
AC GORDON: All right.
Thank you again Anne.
And so now we are
at the end of our meeting.
Thank you to everyone for your patience
and for bearing with us this far.
I notice our numbers are declining,
so I did want to thank everyone who have
who had participated with us today,
who bore with the technology issues.
Thank you so much for your patience.
Lastly, I would just like to ask
if there's any business
Seeing none,
no new business
or issues from Council members,
then I would move to formally close
the public portion of the meeting
and enter into our closed session.
Do we need a motion to close or
SOMMERS MCINTOSH: Madam Chair?
We will
You will ask for the motion to adjourn
the meeting from the closed session.
And at this time
we can say goodbye to everybody and
and ask staff to depart
and the public to depart.
And we will enter into a closed
session once we are able.
AC GORDON: Okay,
well, you've
all received the instructions from Anne.
So I guess
what we're doing right now
is there's no motion to adjourn,
but I will ask everyone
to go ahead and step out.
Thank you so much.
This does close the public portion
of our meeting and council members.
Please stay on as
we will be going into our closed session.
So thank you to all members of the public
and staff for joining us today.